/4 Stud^ /4na6tc 

^(dcofte ^^nee 

^ finelimc^uin^ ecUtco^ 

/4 ^e^ene^tce S^*0dca^ /4na6lc 


S^ttte^ 7 . ^6del-‘7H<i<i<id 

^&dei-‘7Hale^ StSacd ‘7H'. ‘Sadatvl 

aa4<^ccatco*t e<Ht^ 

It. “THc^^viuii^ 


7i«U(Aena4ttf, Ai6fuvi^ 

eutd 

^mt&t ^ofi ^Tte^ftft <futd ^Ttont^ /4^tcc^}ut> StcceUeo- 

Tiuiinenaittf^ '7ftic^c(^^^*t' 

/4>tSoft 

20 tt 



Published in 2011 by MPublishing 
University of Michigan Library 


This volume is reprinted from the 1979 edition by arrangement with the Center for Near Eastern 
and North African Studies, University of Michigan 

From the original edition: 

Copyright is claimed until June 1989. Thereafter all portions of this work covered by this 
copyright will be in the public domain. 

This work was developed under a grant from the U.S. Office of Education, Department of Health, 
Education, and Welfare. However, the content does not necessarily reflect the position or policy 
of that agency, and no official endorsement of these materials should be inferred. 


ISBN 978-1-60785-216-2 



fi'lj j "^ IJf 

if 



A Stud^ ^DeeUcated * 7 ^ 
TTce CnadU CioiUfajUim 



FOREWORD 


The preparation of this volvme was facilitated by the 
University of Michigan Center for Near Eastern and North Afri¬ 
can Studies as part of its general program of research and 
training on the languages and cultures of the area. 

We are indebted to the United States Office of Education 
for grants to the Center that have made this work possible. 


W. D. Schorger 
Director 


iv 



INTRODUCTION 


I would like to state at the beginning that this is A 
PRELIMINARY EDITION. It is hoped that this Preliminary Edition 
will arouse the interest of our colleagues and students and will 
solicit their responses to assist us in preparing the Final Edi¬ 
tion. We welcome all comments, suggestions and remarks on the 
content, topics, method, technique, presentation of material, 
arrangement, 'and typographical and other errors. 

A Comprehensive Study of Egyptian Arabic , Volumes I-IV 
is designed for the Intermediate - Advanced student of Egyptian 
Arabic to serve as a course in the language, culture, customs 
and traditions of Egypt. The study presupposes knowledge of 
Egyptian Arabic on the Elementary level. 

A Comprehensive Study of Egyptian Arabic consists of four 
volumes of which the present study is Volume Three. 

Volume One. Conversations, Cultural Texts and Socio- 
linguistic Notes , 1978 (Second Edition) aims at acquainting the 
student with the people of Egypt - how they live, act and react 
on happy and unhappy occasions, how they relate to each other in 
their daily lives, how they spend their leisure time, etc. - 
through conversations and cultural notes. It also presents 
glimpses of the history of Egypt and its role in the evolution 
of human civilization. The 50 cultural texts of Volume One also 
shed some light on the Egyptian personality: humor, folk litera¬ 
ture, craftsmanship, etc. 

Volume Two. Proverbs and Metaphoric Expressions , A Prelimi¬ 
nary Edition, 1978, includes 695 Proverbs and 276 metaphoric 


V 




expressions. It aims at acquainting the American student with 
the important roles these expressions play in everyday speech 
in Egyptian society. 

Volume Three. The main emphasis of this volume is on 
grammatical and linguistic terms in a dictionary form with 
definitions and illustrations of all the grammatical features 
of Egyptian Arabic conveniently arranged in alphabetical order. 

VolTxme Four. Lexicon ; Part I: Egyptian Arabic - English 

(34 Cultural Categories) 
Part II: English - Egyptian Arabic 
(34 Cultural Categories) 

includes basic high frequency words in such categories as Animals 
and Insects, Colors, Food and Kitchen Utensils, Greetings and 
Etiquette, etc. 

We would like to express our thanks to those who have 
helped us in the preparation of this Edition. We are indebted 
to the U.S. Office of Education of the Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare for the financial support which enabled us 
to complete this study; to the Center for Near Eastern and North 
African Studies at the University of Michigan and to its Director, 
Professor William D. Schorger, for all the help and support ex¬ 
tended during the work on the study. Thanks are due to Profes¬ 
sor Wallace M. Erwin for giving freely of his time, for his 
valuable suggestions and his great interest in the study. To 
Ms. Amy Van Voorhis who helped in proofreading the entire manu¬ 
script we owe a special debt of gratitude. Her devotion, con¬ 
scientiousness, constructive remarks and creativity throughout 
the work on the study are deeply appreciated. 


vi 



Thanks are extended also to Ms. Amy Van Voorhis and Ms. 
Nancy Adams for an excellent job in typing the English and 
phonetic sections of the study. Their dependability and dedi¬ 
cation are deeply appreciated. 

Ann Arbor Ernest T. Abdel-Massih 

June 1979 


vii 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Dedication . iii 

Foreword iv 

Introduction . v 

A REFERENCE GRAMMAR OF EGYPTIAN ARABIC: GRAMMATICAL AND 

LINGUISTIC TERMS (arranged alphabetically) . 3 

Index 331 

Bibliography . 337 


ix 










A 

REFERENCE GRAMMAR 
OF 

EGYPTIAN ARABIC : 

GRAfflATICAL AND LINGUISTIC TERMS 




EGyPTlM ARABIC 


3 


REFERENCE- GRAMMAR 


- A - 


ACTIVE PARTICIPLES ; DEFINITENESS 


If an active participle ( AP ) denotes a semantic extension ( see 
"Active Participles : Meaning" ), it is made definite by the addition 
of i I- 

Indefinite Definite 

kaatib 'an author' ilkaatib 'the author 

muxrig 'a producer' iImuxrig 'the producer' 

If it denotes the.basic designation ( see: Active Participles: 
Meaning ), an active participle is made definite by placing i11 i or 
iI - before it ( iI - and i11 i being interchangeable when the participle 
constitutes the entire modifier, and i I I i being the favored choice 
when the participle is the first word of an adjectival phrase ) : 


Indefinite 
raagi! naayim 
'a sleeping man' 

raagiI mitalla? miraatu 
'a man who has divorced 
his wife 


Definite 

irraagil iili naayim or 
irraagil innaayim 'the 
sleeping man' 

irraagil iI I i mtaI la? miraatu 
'the man who has divorced 
his wife' 


*** 


*** 


ik itit 




EGVVnAN mSK 


4 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


ACTIVE PARTICIPLES : VERIVATWN 

For Measure I of txiliteral verbs the active participle is of 
the measure FaaTiL . For doubled verbs the variant of Faa?!L is 
FaaTi for hollow verbs, FaayiL ; and for defective verbs, FaaTi . 
The following are examples : 


Measure 

Verb 


AP 

Faa?iL 

daxa 1 

'to enter' 

daaxi1 


Yirif 

'to find out' 

Taarif 

FaaTi? 

hatt 

'to put' 

haat it 

FaayiL 

naam 

'to sleep' 

naayim 


yaab 

'to be absent' 

yaayib 

Faa?i 

lawa 

'to roast' 

laawi 


baka 

'to cry' 

baaki 


giri 

'to run’ 

gaar i 


For all other active verbs ( i.e», verbs which co-occur with a 
a form designating the agent ) the active participle is derived from 
the imperfect huwwa form by substituting mi- for the initial yi- . If 
the huwwa form of the verb ends in /a/, that /a/ is replaced by /i/. 
Examples : 


huwwa form 


AF 

yinawwim 

'he puts to sleep' 

minawwim 

yihaddid 

'he sets ( time ) ' 

miRadd i d 

yiTayyin 

'he appoints' 

miTayyin 

yikaat i b 

'he corresponds with' 

mikaat ib 

yi?aayin 

'he inspects' 

mi9aay in 

yitsali im 

'he receives' 

mitsa 11 im 

yitFiayyin 

'he takes advantage 

of an opportunity' 

mitRayyin 

yitfaahim 

'he reaches an under¬ 
standing with ' 

mitfaahim 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


5 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


huwwa form 


AP 

yitTaawin 

'he cooperates with' 

m i t Taaw i n 

y i fit i m i 1 

'he bears' 

mi fitimi 1 

yifitaar 

'he becomes perplexed' 

mifitaar 

y i fimarr 

'he becomes red' 

mi fimi rr 

yista9mi1 

'he uses' 

mistaTmi1 

yitni?i1 

'he moves(intransitive)' 

mitni?i 1 

yistala??af 

'he catches(a ball,etc.)' 

mistala??if 

y idafirag 

'he rolls(something)' 

m idafirig 

yitbarg i 1 

'he becomes confused' 

m it bang i 1 

yitma?inn 

'he beccxnes reassured' 

mitma?inn 

yirabbi 

'he rears' 

mirabbi 

yidaawi 

'he administers medical 

midaawi 


treatment' 


yitbanna 

'he adopts' 

mitbanni 

yistayla 

'he considers(something) 

mi stay! i 


expensive' 


yistamanna 

'he longs for' 

mistamanni 


Under the influence of Standard Arabic, educated Egyptians sometimes 
substitute mu- { rather than mi- ) for the initial yi- of imperfect 
derived verbs. When this takes place, /a/ is also inserted before 
the F_ of Measure V and Measure VI of the triliteral as well as 
Measure II of the quadriliteral ( in Standard Arabic, Measures V 
and VI have /a/ before ). 

Examples : yitsabbib 'to become the cause of : mutasabbib , 
yitraaqi? 'to retreat' : mutaraaqi? , yitzabzib 'to be unstable' : 
mutazabzib . 

As may be expected, such "classicisms" occur only vrtien the EA 
participle corresponds to a Standcurd Arabic participle. 

Verbs of Measure IV and those of Measiure VII are usually borrowings 
from Standard Arabic; it is therefore not surprising to find that 
the active participle of Measure IV is usually muFTiL ( rather 
than miF?iL ) and that the active participle of Measure VII is 


usually munFa?iL ( rather than minFi?iL ). Examples ; a^dam 'to 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


6 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


execute’ : muTdim , aTrab 'to express' : mu^rib , in?aqad 'to 
convene ( intransitive ) ' : mun?aqid , insafiab 'to withdraw { intran¬ 
sitive )' : munasafiib . 

Passive verbs ( q.v. ) do not usually yield the active participle. 
This is because the active participle is agentive ( it usually means 
'doer' or 'is doing' ), and passive verbs belong to a construction 
vdiose agent is not specified ( the grammatical subject of the passive 
construction designates the recipient ). Thus the form itna?al 
yields an active participle if it is used with reflexive meaning but 
not when it is passive. 

Sentence v/ith !tn3?ai 
fariid i‘tna?al minmakaanu 
w?ayad fi makaan taani. 

'Farid moved from his place 
and sat in another place. ' 


a?raf inn fariid itna?aI 
laakin tnafrafS mi in na?alu. 

'I know that Farid has been 
transferred, but 1 do not 
know who transferred him.* 

*** *** *** 

ACTH/E PARTICIPLES : GENVER OF SINGULAR 

A singular active participle ( whether it denotes the basic 
designation or a semantic extension ) can be inflected for gender. 
The feminine singular form usueilly results from adding /-a/ to the 
corresponding masculine form ; 


Sentence with mitni?il 
lamma rgiTt, la?eef fariid 
mitni?il min makaanu w?aa9id 
fi makaan taani, 

'When I returned I found that 
Farid had moved from his place 
and sat in another place.' 

Uncommon 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


7 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Masculine 
kaat i b 
naayim 
m i t ka I I im 
maaSi 
m istanni 


'having written, writer' 
'sleeping' 

'having spoken' 

'walking' 

'waiting' 


Feminine 

katba 

nayma 

mitka 11 ima 
maiya 

mistanniyya 


Notice that the masculine singular form undergoes certain changes 
upon the addition of -a^ ; those changes are as follows : 

1. If the masculine singular form is of the shape FaaTi , /y/ is 
added after /i/. 

maa§.i + ^a- ^ maaSiy + -a-masya (after Vowel Elision 

and Vowel Shortening) 

2. The /i/ of the sequence -9iL is elided ( seei Vowels : Elision 
at Word Boundaries ). 

kaatib + -a-katba 

3. If the masculine singular form ends in /i/ but is not of the 
shape Faa?i , /yy/ is added after the /\/\ 

mistanni + -a-> mistanniyya 

*** *** 


ACTIl/E PARTICIPLES : MEANING 


A. "Basic" Designation or Meaning 

EA verbs may be divided into the following types ( see "Verbs : 
Aspect" ) : 

1. Verbs with which bi- does not indicate continuity ( "continuity" 
being viewed as the feature of an act or an event in progress ). 
Two major groups belong to this type : 

(a) Stative verbs ( i.e., verbs which designate a state rather 
than an act or event ); e.g., 

biyifham 'he catches on' 

biyiYraf 'he (usually) knows' 

(b) Verbs which designate change of, or fixation of, location; 
e.g., 





EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


8 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


biyruufi 
biyirga? 
blyuskun 
biyib?a 


'he goes' 

'he retTirns' 

'he (usually) resides' 
'he remains' 


2 . 


Verbs with which bi- indicates 
repetitiveness, i.e., repeated 
b i y i kt i b 
biyidris 
b i y i t ka I I i m 


continuity ( as well as 
action ); e.g., 

'he is writing' 

'he is studying' 

'he is speaking' 


The active participle from verbs of Type 1(a) expresses a current 
state. 

Examples : 

faahiiti 'understands' 

9aarif 'knows' 

ana faahim iI Ii hiyya bit?uu Iu 
'I understand vdiat she is saying.' 


The active participle from verbs of Type 1(b) means 'is perfoming 
what the verb designates'. 


Examples 


raayifi 
saakin 
raag i ? 

ana raayiFi masr. 

• • •• 


'(is) going' 

'(is) residing' 

' (is) returning' 

'I am on my way to Egypt.' 


The active pairticiple from verbs of Type 2 means ' ( in a state of ) 
having performed what the verb designates'. 




EGVVTIM ARABIC 


9 


REFEREiVCE GRAMMAR 


Examples : 

daaris 
kaat ib 
mitkalI im 


'having studied* 
'having written' 
'having spoken' 


fariida darsa 


'Farida has studied (literally 
'is in a state of having studied') . 


The above statements point out an interesting observation ; 
when bi- does not express continuity, the active participle does? 
when bi- expresses continuity, the active participle expresses 
something else. 

To obtain the correct English translation, one must make sure 
that the Arabic participle and the English equivalent occur with 
comparable temporal and aspectual reference. 

iImayya qarya . 'The water is running .' 

iImayya qqarya 'The running water' 

irraagil naaziI . 'The man is coming down .' 
irraagi1 innaaziI 'The man who is coming down ' 


In some contexts, certain 
such contexts often include 
ana raayifi masr bukra. 
ana mil mitnaaziI ?an 
Fia??i fiatta law 
ittarreet asta?iil. 


active participles designate futurity; 
adverbials referring to the future : 

'I am going to Egypt tomorrow.' 

'I will not relinquish my rights 
even if I find it necessary to 
resign.* 


B. Semcmtic Extension 

Some active participles can be used in either of the following 
ways : 

1. With the basic designation 

2. With a meaning which is related to, but which is not precisely 
the same as, the basic designation; this meaning will be called 



EGWriAN ARABIC- 


10 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


the "extension". For example, kaatIb can mean 'having written' 
hut it also can mean 'an author': 


mi in minkum kaatib ilwaagib ? 

'Who among you has written the hcmework? 
issibaati kaatib mashuur. 

'Al-Siba'i is a famous author.' 


Likewise, haakim can mean 'is ruling' but it can also mean 
'governor, ruler'. 


Difference in aspect is part of w^iat distinguishes the basic 
designation from the extension: vrtiile the basic designation includes 
aspect, the extension does not. Con^are, for example, the participles 


in each of the following pairs. ( 
tive; Extension =* Noun ): 

Iiyaayit dilwa?ti ?ali 
kaat !b Tilriin maqaala. 
fall kaatib mafruuf. 

irra?iis fiaakim iddawla 
byadd min Fiad i id 
mafii2 fiaakim afisan min da. 


Basic designation = Verbal adjec- 

'As of this moment, Ali has 
written twenty articles.' 

'Ali is a well-known author.' 

'The president is ruling the 
country with an iron hand.' 

'There is no better ruler than 
this one.' 


C. Absence of Person Designation 

Onlike verbs, active participles do not denote person. Thus 
in isolation the form faahim does not indicate whether reference 
is to first, second, or third person; the same is true of fahma 
and fahmiin. 


*** 


*** 


*** 


EGVmAN ARABIC 


11 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


ACTIVE PARTICIPLES NUMBER 

A. Active participles which denote a semantic extension ( typically 
nominal ) 

If it denotes a semantic extension ( see; Active Participles : 
Meaning ), am active participle may be singular, dual, or plural. 
The dual is formed by addition of -een to the singular form : 


Singular 


kaat i b 

'an author (m)' 

?aad i 

'a judge (m)' 

murabbi 

'an educator (m)' 

katba 

'an author (f)' 

?adya 

'a judge (f)' 

murabbiyya 

'an educator (f)' 


Dual 
kat been 
?adiyeen 
murabbiyyeen 
katbiteen 
?adyiteen 
murabbiyyiteen 


'two authors (m)' 
'two judges (m)' 
'two educators (m) ' 
'two authors (f) ' 
'two judges (f)' 
'two educators (f) ' 


Notice that certain masculine singular forms undergo specifiable 
changes upon the addition of - een ; those changes are as follows ; 

1. If the masculine singular form is of the shape FaaYi , /y/ 
is added after /i/. 

?aad i + -een-> ?aad iy + -een-> ?adyeen 

2. The /]/ o£ the sequence - ?iL is elided ( see "Vowels : 
Eiision at Word Boundaries" ) : 

kaat ib + -een-•> kat been ( after Vowel Shortening ) 

3. If the masculine singular form ends in /i/ but is not of 
the shape Faa?i , /yy/ is added after the /]/ : 

murabb i + -een-■> murabb iyyeen 

Provided it is derived from a verb other than a Measure I 
triliteral, and provided it denotes a human being, each of the 
active participles being discussed typically has two plural 
forms ; the sound masculine, and the sound feminine; the former 
results from adding - iin to the masculine singular, while the 
latter results from adding - aat to the feminine singular. 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


12 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Singular 
murabbi 
murabbiyya 


Plural 


'an educator (m)' murabbiyyiin 

'an educator (f)' murabbiyyaat 

Notice that the addition of - ii n is governed by the same rules 
which govern the addition of - een . 

Provided it is derived from a verb other than a Measure I 
triliteral, and provided it designates a non-human referent, each 
of the active participles in question typically has a sound 
feminine plural form : 

Singular Plural 

musakkin 'a tranquilizer' musakkinaat 

muxaddir 'a narcotic' muxaddiraat 

muqaatila 'combat plane' muqaatilaat 

muFiarrik 'a propeller' muFiarrikaat 


If derived from Measure I triliteral verbs, the active participles 
in question typically have broken plurals; the following measures 
are among the most common for these plurals ; 

1. Fu??aaL , from hollow roots when the referents are human. 

2. FuTaah , from defective roots when the referents are human. 

3. Fawaa?iL , when the referents are nonhvnnan. 

Educated Egyptians sometimes use a Standard Arabic sound feminine 
plural, instead of the broken plural, to designate human referents 
which are exclusively female. However, the majority of speakers 
use the broken plurals below: 


Singular 


Plural 

zaa?ir ~ zaayir 

'a guest, visitor' 

zuwwaar 

naa?ib - naayib 

'a delegate' 

nuwwaab 

taag ir 

'a merchant' 

tuggaar 

?aad i 

'a judge' 

?udaah 

raawi 

'a narrator' 

ruwaah 

daaf 

'an incentive' 

dawaafi? 

taar i? 

'an emergency' 

tawaari? 

daaTi 

'a necessity' 

dawaafi 

Fiadsa 

'an accident' 

Fiawaad i s 

sa?ya 

'a water wheel' 

sawaa?i 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


13 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


B. Active Participles which denote the basic designation (i.e., 

= adjectival ) 

If it denotes the basic designation, an active participle may be made 
singular or plural ( the dual is rarely used ). The plural is 
typically a sound form which results from adding -I i n to the mascu¬ 
line singular, and which may modify a masculine or a feminine plural noun. 

Certain masculine singular forms undergo specifiable changes upon 
the addition of - iin . The changes in question are the same as those 
which take place upon adding - iin to a masculine singular participle 
with a semantic extension. 


Masculine 

singular 

Feminine Singular 

waa?if 

'standing' 

wa?fa 

faahim 

'understands' 

fahma 

maaSi 

'walking' 

malya 

mistanni 

'waiting' 

m istanniyya 

mit?aadi 

'to be enemies 

(with)' mit?adlyya 


Plural 
wa?f i i n 
fahmiin 
maSyiin 
mistanniyyi in 
nnit?ad iyy i i n 


irraagiI i 11 i waa?if 
irraagleen illi wa?fiin 
irriggaala I 1i wa?fiin 
issitt illi wa?fa 
issittiteen illi wa?fiin 
issittaat illi wa?fiin 


'the man who is standing' 

'the two men who are standing' 
'the men who are standing' 

'the lady who is standing' 

'the two ladies who are standing' 
'the ladies who are standing' 


Combining number and gender contrasts, we get the following forms : 
1. For participles with a semantic extension ( i.e., = nominal ) 

(a) Masculine singular; e.g., murabbi 'an educator', kaatib 
'an author'. 

(b) Feminine singular; e.g., murabbiyya , katba . 

(c) Masculine dual; e.g., murabbIyyeen , katbeen . 

(d) Feminine dual; e.g., murabbiyyiteen , katbiteen . 

(e) Plural 


(i) Sound masculine; e.g., murabbiyyiin . 

(ii) Sound feminine; e.g., murabbIyyaat . 



BSWnAN ARABIC 


14 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


(iii) Broken; e.g., kuttaab . 

2- For paurticiples with the basic designation ( i.e., 

= adjectival ) 

(a) Masculine singuleu:; e.g., waa?lf 'standing*. 

(b) Feminine singtilar; e.g., wa?fa . 

(c) Plural; e.g., wa?fiin . 

Ititit *4r* 

ACTIVE PARTICIPLES : SyNTACTK USAGE 

1. when they denote the "basic designation" ( see; Active Participles : 
Meaning ), active participles usually occur in adjectival slots : 

irraagil ill i v«aa?if mil blylTraf ?arabi. 

'The man who is stcuiding does not know Arabic.' 

When used adjectivally, active participles agree with the modified 
noun in ntsnber, gender, cuui definiteness ( see: Adjectival Use of 
Participles ) 

Active participles with the basic designation also occur in 
nominal slots : 

11 fiadr 11n yixabbaru I yaybi in . 

'Those vdio are present should inform those who are not.' 

Notice however that, when used nominally, an active participle 
with the basic designation is actually a contraction of an 
attributive construction; thus I I Fiadri I n amd 11 yaybi I n in the 
edaove sentence axe contractions of il?a§xaas iIfiadriin 'the 
persons who are present' and i l?aSxaas ilyaybiin 'the persons 
who are absent' respectively. 

2. An active participle of a transitive verb, when it denotes the 
basic designation, may be used with verbal force, i.e., it cam have 
a direct object ; 

(a) inta fakirni ? 

'Do you remember me ?' 

(b) i I bint ill! fahtna ddars ismaha eeh ? 

'What is the name of the girl who understands the lesson ? 



EGYPTJAN ARABIC 


15 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


In sentence (a), the pronominal suffix attached to the active 
participle is -ni ( the direct object suffix which is attached 
to verbs, e.g., ka11imitni 'she talked to me' ) rather than -J_ 

{ the possessive suffix which is attached to nouns, e.g., kitaabi 
'my book' ). In sentence (b), iddars is a direct object of the 
participle; were iddars in construct with the participle, the 
latter would have assumed the form fahmit ( compare maktabit gamfitna 
'the library of our university' ). 

3. When used as a semantic extension ( see "Active Participles : 
Meaning" ), active participles usually occur in nominal slots : 
i I fiaakim raagi I Tandu zimma. 

'The governor is a man of integrity.' 
wazzafna Taamil gidiid. 

'We employed a new laborer.' 
itkaI Iimt ma?a ftaal ib . 

'I spoke with the student.' 

*** *** *** 

APJECTII/AL PHRASE JblTROVUCEV BY bitaa? 

The word bitaa? ( feminine : bitaa?a , plural : bituu? ) usually 
occurs as the first term of a definite construct phrase which modifies 
a preceding definite noun, and agrees in gender and number with the 
noun modified : 

ilkitaab bitaa? il?ustaaz feen ? 

'Where is the professor's book ?' 
ilSanta btaStak feen ? 

'Where is your suitcase ?' 
dool ilkitabeen bituu?i. 

'These are my two books.' 

Occasionally, the bitaa9 construct is indefinite and modifies a 
preceding indefinite noun : 

di Sarabiyya btaaSit waziir. 

'This is a ( cabinet ) minister's car.' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


16 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


As the above examples show, bitaa? usually indicates a relation¬ 
ship of possession or belonging ; the referent of the preceding 
form is possessed by or belongs to the referent of the following 
form. Another common meaning is 'having to do with, used for, 
dealing in, etc.' : 

iSSirka bta?t il?aflaam 

'the film ( -producing ) company' 

iddukkaan bitaa? issagaayir 

'the cigarette shop' 

i I Tarabiyyaat bita?t ijjiiaati 

'the ice cream ( -vending ) cars' 

ilfingaan bitaa? i!?ah.w3 

'the coffee cup' 

irraagil bitaa? ilfigi 

'the radish seller' 

When it designates possession or belonging , the construct with 
bitaa? often corresponds to a semantically equivalent noun construct, 
for example, 

il^anta bitaafit ilwaziir = Santit ilwaziir 
'the minister's suitcase' 

Many bitaa? constructions meaning "having to do with, used for, etc.' 
also have semeuitically equivalent noun constructs, for example, 
iSSirka bitaaTit il?aflaam = Sirkit il?afiaam 
'the film company' 

Some bitaaY constructions meaning "used for, dealing in, etc." can 
drop the modified noun, e.g., 

bitaa? ilfigi = irraagil bitaa? ilfigi 
'the radish seller' 

Many noun constructs do not designate possession or belonging, and 
for most of these there are no synonymous bitaa? constructs. The 
following noun constructs have no corresponding bitaa? constructs : 
a?daa? ilfir?a ( where the second noun 

'the members of the team' comprises the first ) 


EGyPTlM ARABIC 


17 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


( where the sequence is a 
naming construction ) 


( where the second noun 
drives the first ) 

( where the second noun is 
semantically a qualifier of 
the first ) 

( where the possession desig¬ 
nated is inaliencible ) 


( where the first noun is a 
container and the second is 
the contents ) 

The following comments deal with the choice between the bitaa? 
construct and the noun construct : 

1. The choice between the bitaaT construct and the equivalent 
noun construct may be stylistic : if the speaker for some 
reason prefers to make the "possessed" noun definite, he 
selects the bitaa? construct; consider, for example, the 
following sentence ; 

xadt talat kutub ; ilkitaab illi kaan Tala ttarabeeza, 
wilkitaab illi kaan fi maktabak, wilkitaab bitaaTi 
( instead of wi ktaabi ). 

'I took three books : the book which was on the table, 
the book which was in your office, and my book ( literally 
"and the book which belongs to me" ).' 

Having used a definite noun in referring to the first book 
and a definite noun in referring to the second, the speaker 


madiinit tanta 
'the city of Tanta'; 
kiImit kitaab 
'the word kitaab ' 

Tarabiyyaat iddiizil 
'Diesel ( -driven ) cars' 

fiayaat ilmarafi 

'the life of merriment' 

umm i 1 waIad 
'the boys mother'; 
d iraaTi 
'my arm' 

fingaa1 ?ahwa 
'a cup of coffee' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


18 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


chooses ( but is not forced ) to use a definite noun in 
referring to the third book; this choice forces him to use 
the bItaa? construct since a definite noun cannot be used 
as the first member of a noun construct. 

2. When the "possessed” noun is to be modified by an adjective, 
the noun construct may result in ambiguity; to avoid such 
ambiguity, the bitaa? construct is used. For example, 
kitaab ittilmiiz iqgidiid may mean 'the new student's book' 

or 'the student's new book'; to avoid the ambiguity, one 
would usually say ilkitaab iggidiid bitaa? ittilmiiz 'the 
student's new book' or ilkitaab bitaa? ittilmiiz iqgidiid 
'the new student's book'. 

3. An attributive construction may constitute a compound word 
or a stereotyped expression whose noxin cannot be separated 
from the adjective. To express a relationship of possession 
between the noun of such a construction and some other noun, 
speakers commonly use the bitaa? construct rather than the 
noun construct. For example, 'your university city ( i.e. 
the complex where students reside )' is expressed in EA by 
ilmadiina qgaami?iyya btayitkuin rather than madinitkum 
igqaami?iyya . 

The attributive constructions under discussion include 
expressions of measurement where the modifier is murabba? 

'square' or mukaT?ab 'cube'. Thus ilmitr iImurabbaT bitaaTak 
'your squcire meter' is common while mitrak ilmurabba? is 
hardly used. 

4. Seme loan words — mostly ones which end in a vowel — 
seldom take pronominal suffixes ( e.g., kiilu 'kilogram', 
radyu 'radio', banyu 'bathtub', airt!nna 'antenna' ); instead, 
those words are modified by the bitaa? construct. 

"Inalienable possession" ( which applies to kinship and parts 
of the body ) is expressed by a noun construct but not by the 
bitaa? construct : 


5. 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


19 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


uxti 'my sister’ 

rigi i 'my leg' 

An exception to this rule is : 

issitt bitaTti 'my wife' 

6. Dual nouns and sound masculine plural ones do not enter into 
construct with a following pronominal suffix; possession of such 
nouns is indicated through use of the bitaa? construct : 

iIkitabeen bituuTi 
'my two books' 
ilmu?alIimiin bituuTi 
'my teachers' 

7. In certain idiomatic expressions, .the occurrence of bitaaT 

is governed by no general rule; the following sentences contain 
some of the expressions in question : 
da raagil bitaa? niswaan . 

'He is a skirt-chaser.' 

ana mi§ bitaa? kalaam zayy da . 

'I don't go for that kind of thing.' 
dool naas bituu? rabbina . 

'These are godly people.' 
issitt bta?ti lubnaniyya. 

'My wife is Lebanese.' 
da I beeh bitaafi . 

'This is my husband.' 

Idicxns such as these must be learned as items. 

*** *** *** 


AVJECnVAL USE OE PARTICIPLES 

A participle may fill an adjectival slot. In this case the 
participle is governed by the rules of agreement stated under 
"Adjectives : Attributive Construction". 

If it constitutes the entire modifier, the participle is made 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


20 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


definite by placing either i I - or i I I i before it. Although both 
alternatives are possible in this context, i I - is favored with passive 
pcirticiples while iI I i is favored with active participles, 
bint wa?fa 'a girl standing' 

iI bint iI I i wa?fa or ( less commonly ) 

ilbint ilwa?fa 'the girl who is standing' 

ilbanaat ill i naymiin or ( less commonly ) 

ilbanaat innaymiin 'the sleeping girls' 

ilkutub iImaniuura hina or ( less commonly ) 

ilkutub illi manluura hina 'the books published here' 

When it is the first word of an adjectival construction, an active 
participle occurs with illi much more commonly than it does with i I - 
( this is especially true when the active participle has an object ) , 
while a passive participle occurs more commonly with i I - than it does 
with illi . 

issitt illi wa?fa hnaak or ( rarely ) 

issitt ilwa?fa hnaak 'the lady who is standing over 

there' 

irraagil illi raakib gamaI or ( rarely ) 

irraag i I irraakib gamaI 'the man who is riding a camel' 

ilmaqaala Imansuura fgar idt il?ahraam or ( less commonly ) 
ilmaqaala II i manSuura fgar idt 'the article published in the 
il?ahraam newspaper Al-Ahram ' 

Adjectival participles have three forms ; the masculine singular, 
the feminine singular, and the plural; the first modifies a masculine 
singular noun, the second modifies a feminine singular noun, and the 
third modifies a dual or a plural noun : 
irraagil illi waa?if hinaak 
'the man who is standing over there' 
issitt illi wa?fa hnaak 
'the lady \dio is standing over there' 
irragleen / issitteen illi wa?fiin hinaak 
'the two men / ladies who are standing over there' 
irriggaala / issittaat illi wa?fiin hinaak 
'the men / ladies who are standing over there' 




EGyPTJM ARABIC 


21 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


irraagil ilmaTrauf 
'the well-knovm man' 
issitt iImaTruufa 
'the well-knovm lady' 
irragleen / issitteen ilma^rufiin 
'the two well-known men / ladies 
irriggaala / issittaat ilma?rufiin 
'the well-known men / ladies' 

itfeit itielt hitie 


AVJECTIVE 

A word which limits, qualifies or describes a noun or a pronoun. 
Many Egyptian Arabic adjectives have the structure FVSWL, e.g., 
kibiir 'big' 

However, the patterns vary, e.g., 

Fa?9aaL nassaab 'swindler' 

It is worth mentioning that /nassaab/ is a noun that serves as a 
modifier and therefore is classified as an adjective. 

Noun Adjective 

raagil nassaab 'a swindler' 

(a swindling man) 

*** *** *** 


ADJECTIVE : AGREEMENT WITH NOWS 

An adjective ( modifier ) agrees in gender with the singular no\in 
it modifies, ( n m + adj m ) or ( n f + adj f ), e.g., 

ittaaiiba nnabiiha 'the intelligent student' 

Singular adjectives must agree in gender with the singular nouns they 
modify, e.g.. 




EGYPTIM ARABIC 


22 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


walad kibiir 'a big boy' 

bint kbiira 'a big girl' 

With human plural nouns, adjectives agree in number but not us\ially 
in gender : 

awlaad kubaar 'big boys' 

banaat kubaar 'big girls' 

However, with non-human plural nouns, either plural adjectives or 
feminine singular adjectives may be used ; 

kutub kubaar 'big books' 

kutub kibiira ‘'big books' 

Some speakers of EA use the latter structure even when the modified 
noun is human plural. 

awlaad kutaar 'many boys' 

awlaad kitiira 'many boys' 


and 

banaat kutaar 
banaat kitiira 


'many girls' 
'many girls' 


*** *** *** 


ADJECTIVE : ATTRIBimVE CONSTRUCTIONS ( OR NOUN-ADJECTIVE PHRASES ) 

An adjective follows the noun it modifies. The form of the adjective 
is determined by the number, gender, definiteness and humanness of the 
modified noun. The masculine singular form of the adjective follows 
a masculine singular noun, the feminine singulaur form follows a 
feminine singular or a non-human plural noun, and the plural form 
follows a dual noun ( whether human or non-human ) or a human plural 
noun. The adjective is definite when the modified noun is definite, 
and indefinite when the modified noun is indefinite. 

?abilt raag i I masr i . 'I met an Egyptian man.' 

?abilt sitt masriyya . 'I met an Egyptian woman.' 

istareet kutub masriyya . 'I bought ( some ) Egyptian books. 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


23 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


?abilt ragleen masriyyiin . 'I met two Egyptian men.' 

?abilt binteen masriyyiin . 'I met two Egyptian girls.' 

iStareet kitabeen yaIyiin . 'I bought two expensive books.* 

?abilt riggaala masriyyiin . 'I met ( some ) Egyptian men.' 

?abiIt sittaat masriyyiin . 'I met ( some ) Egyptian women.' 

?abilt irrigaala Jmasriyyiin. 'I met the Egyptiain men.' 

?abilt issittaat iImasriyyiin 'I met the Egyptian women.' 

Notice that when a suffix consisting of or beginning with a vowel 
is added to a form ending in /i/ ( provided that form is not of the 
shape Faayj ) , /yy/ is inserted between the form and the suffix. 

As illustrated above, the adjective shows contrast for humanness 
when the modified noun is plural : if the plvural noun designates human 
referents, the adjective is usually plural; if the plural noun 
designates non-human referents, the adjective is usually feminine 
singular. 

zurt ba?d ittul laab i Imasr iyy i in . 

'I visited some Egyptian students (m).' 
zurt baTd issittaat iImasriyyiin . 

'I visited some Egyptian ladies.' 
zurt ba?d iimudun iImasriyya . 

'I visited some Egyptian cities.' 

Tandi kutub kibiira . 

'I have large books.' 

Nisba adjectives denoting color, e.g., ramaadi 'ash-grey', bunni 
'brown', samaawi 'sky-blue', and those denoting place of origin ( when 
modifying non-human nouns ) are usually masculine singular regardless 
of the form of the modified noun, e.g., 

Tarabiyya gd i ida but ?arabiyya aImaani 

'a new car' 'a German car' 

siggaada gam i iI a but siggaada ?agam i 

'a Persian carpet' 


'a pretty carpet' 





EGYPUAN ARABIC 


24 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


fasatiin ya1ya 

but 

fasat iin ramaadi 

'expensive dresses' 


'grey dresses' 

budaa?a wifiSa 

but 

budaa?a baiadi 

'bad goods' 


'local ( locally manufactured 

goods' 

naas kwayyislin 

but 

naas baiadi 

'nice people' 


'low class people' 


Itote that the last example is a special case where the rule is 
extended to a noun with human referent. 

Certain structures cu:e made up of a noun followed by another noun 
where the second noun expresses a 'made of relationship, e.g^., 


saafa dahab 
*a gold watch' 

fustaneen fari ir 
'two silk dresses' 

riggaala wara? 

'feeble men' 

C literally: 'paper men' ) 

Notes : 1. Although EA usually employs a single sound plural form 

of the adjective ( which form ends in -iin ), educated 
Egyptians occasionally use two sound pluTcd. forms : a 
masculine form ending in -iin , and a fooinine one ending 
in -aat , e.g., 

murabbiyyiin fad I iin 'virtuous educators (m)' 

murabbiyyaat fadiIaat 'virtuous educators (f) ' 

Expressions where soiaid feminine plural adjectives occur 
are usually "classicisms”. 




EGVmMl ARABIC 


25 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


2. An adjective which modifies a collective noun is masculine 
singular. The collective form referred to here is that 
vdxich yields the "unit noun" by acquiring the suffix -a_ 

( e.g., t iffaaFi 'apples', from which the unit noun is 
t iffaaha 'an apple' ). { see: Collective Novms ) 

tiffaafi kibi ir 'large apples' 

wara? xafiif 'thin paper' 

3. Although it was stated that an adjective modifying a 
plural noun with non-human reference is usually faninine 
singular in form, the pliiral form of the adjective is 
also often used in this instance, especially if the noun 
is a broken plural, e.g., 

talat kutub qid iida 

or 'three new books' 

talat kutub qudaad 

4. Though more commonly followed by the plural form of the 
adjective, broken plural nouns which designate human beings 
but are morphologically feminine singular are sometimes 
followed by the feminine singular form of the adjective, 

e.g., 

ri ggaaI a fiat y ii n ' C a group of ) inconse- 

or quential men' 

riggaala Fiafya 

iticic itie* itieit 

ADJECTIVE : COMPARATIVE AND SUPERLATIVE 

The comparative adjective is invariable in form. For the majority 


adjectives 

the comparative 

form 

is of the 

measure aF?aL 

kibi ir 

'big' - 

-> 

akbar 

'bigger' 

gam i i1 

'pretty' - 

--> 

agma 1 

'prettier' 

tawi i 1 

'tali' - 

--> 

atwa 1 

'taller' 






EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


26 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Adjectives ending in /-i/ or /-w/ have ccsnparative forms of the 
measure aFTa , e.g., 

9aa I i ' high' -> a 91 a ' higher' 

fi i I w ' sweet' -> a ft I a ' sweeter' 

Adjectives with a doubled root have comparative forms on the 
measure aFaTL , e.g., 

gidiid 'new' -> agadd 'newer' 

muhimm 'important' -> ahamm 'more important' 

In expressions indicating comparison, "thcui" is expressed by min 
'from', e.g., 

ilbint akbar min ilwalad. 'The girl is bigger than the boy.' 

hiyya akbar minnu. 'she is bigger them him.' 

In Egyptian Arabic there is no separate morphological form for the 
superlative. It is expressed by one of the following constructions 
using the comparative form : 

Comparative + indefinite form of the noun ( s or p ) 

dool atwal banaat. 'These are the tallest girls.' 

da atwal walad. 'This is the tallest boy.' 

Comparative + numeral + indefinite noun 

dool atwal talat banaat. 'These are the three tallest girls.' 
mi n + ccanparative + definite plural noun 

huwwa min atwal il?awlaad. 'He is one of the tallest boys.' 
Notice that the comparative adjective is not inflected for gender or 
number, whereas the following noun is inflected for both. 

*** *** *** 

ADJECTIVE FUNCTIONING AS PREDICATE 

An adjective may function as the predicate of a sentence or clause. 

In this usage, the subject determines the number and gender of the 
adjective. 

7a I i tawi11. 
nadya tawiila. 


'Ali is tall.' 

' Nadia is tall.' 







EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


27 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


irragleen tuwaal. 'The 

ilbinteen tuwaal. 'The 

irrlggaala twaal. 'The 

issittaat tuwaal. 'The 

Ittarabizaat tawiila. 'The 

• • • 


Itotice that adjectives in predicate 


two men are tall.' 

two girls are tall.' 

men ^u:e tall.' 

women axe tall.' 

tsdjles are long.' 

position are normally indefinite. 


*** *** 


ADJECTIVE : GENDER 

In Egyptian Arabic { EA }, nouns (n) are either masculine (m) 
or feminine {f) in gender, e.g., walad (m) 'boy' bint (f) 'girl'. 
Henceforth, gender indicators will not be entered for those nouns 
where the sex of the referent clearly indicates the grammatical gender. 

Adjectives (adj) show two genders, e.g., nabiih (m) 'intelligent' 
nabiiha (f) 'intelligent'. Ccmpeure the following noxms and adjectives 

taalib (m) taal iba (f) 'student' 

nabiih (m) nabiiha (f) 'intelligent' 

Notice that singuleur (s) feminine nouns and cidjectives end in /-a/. 
Exceptions to this will be indicated by (f). Masculine singular nouns 
and adjectives will thus be identifiable by the absence of /-a/ or by 
the insertion of (m). This convention of indicating gender for 
singular forms will be followed regularly? thus taal ib 'student' euad 
t aa I i ba ' student' have no iii^)osed gender indicators, since it is 
clear that the first word is masculine and the second is f em i n ine. 
Indicators, however, will be entered next to items such as ard (f) 

'land' and mabna (m) 'building' since their endings do not follow the 
the rule above. 




««« 


"kitit 



EGYPTUN ARABIC 


28 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


ADJECTIVE : INFLECTION FOR NUMBER AND GENDER 

In EA, an adjective has three forms : the masculine singular, the 
feminine singular, and the plural. 

The feminine singular form is usually formed by adding the suffix 
-a to the masculine singular form ( which is considered the base ) . 

The plural form is "sound" in the case of some adjectives and "broken" 
in the case of others; the sound plural is formed by adding - i i n to 
the masculine singular form, while the broken plural is formed by 
"breaking up" the masculine singular through internal change ; 


kuwayyis 

* 50 od * 

(ms) 

kuwayyisa 

'good' 

(fs) 

kuwayyisi in 

'good' 

(sound plural) 

kibi ir 

■big’. 

(ms) 

k i b i i ra 

'big' 

(fs) 

kubaar 

'big' 

(broken plural) 

There is no structural device which infallibly forecasts the plural 

form for each singular adjective; nevertheless, the student will be 

reasonably safe in assuming 

that the following adjectives have sound 

plural forms : 



1. Active and passive 

participles which have the basic desig- 

nation ( see "Active 

Participles 

: Meaning" and "Passive 

Participles : Meaning" ) ; 


Singular 


Plural 

naay im 

'sleeping' 

naymiin 

m i t ?a 1 1 im 

'educated' 

m it?a 11 im i i n 

maTruuf 

'known' 

maTruf iin 

mu?aaqab 

'punished' 

muTaqbiin 

2. Relative ( nisba ) 

adjectives ; 


Singular 


Plural 

masr i 

'Egyptian' 

masriyyiin 

azhar i 

'Azharite' 

azhariyyiin 



EGVVTUN ARABIC 


29 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


3. Adjectives of the measures Fjjj 
Singular 

kuwayyis 'good' 

?usayyar 'short' 

nassaab 'a swind] 


'a swindler' 


kaslaan 'lazy' kaslaniin 

Exceptions do occur; for example, the plural of turki 
'Turkish' is atraak . 

Broken plural adjectives have numerous measures; in addition, 
it is not possible to predict with certainty which broken plural 
measure a given singular adjective will have. The student is 
therefore advised to learn the broken plural forms as items. 


Fa??aaL , and Ea?i,aan ; 
Plural 
kuwayyisi in 
?usayyariin 
nassabiin 
kaslani in 


Tab i it 'stupid' Tubata 

maskiin 'poor' masakiin 

For nisba adjectives designating color or place of origin and 
for attributive constructions indicating type of product or 
social status, see Adjectives ; Attributive Construction . 


Plural 

Tubata 


maskiin 


masakiin 


*** *** 


APJECTIl/ES JOINEV BY C00RPTWATIN6 CONJUNCTJONS 


Two adjectives may be joined by a coordinating conjunction : 
samiira nabiiha wlatra. 

'Samira is intelligent and clever.' 

ibnak nabiih laakin kaslaan. 

'Your son is intelligent but lazy.' 
humma twaai walla Tsayyariin ? 

'Are they tall or short ?' 

In Arabic the coordinating conjunction cannot be dropped when more 
than two adjectives are conjoined ( as it can be in English, e.g., 
"tall, dark and handsome ). 

tawiil gasman ^ wasiim 'tall, dark, and handsome' 




EGyPTIAW ARABIC 


30 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Since they xisually refer to the same noun, conjoined adjectives 
are usually identical in regard to number, gender, and definiteness. 


APJECTWE : SIUMBER ANV DEMONSTRATIVES 


Singular adjectives must agree in gender with the singular nouns 
they modify. With human plural nouns, adjectives agree in number. 
However, with non-human plural nouns, either plural adjectives or 
feminine singular adjectives may be used. The same is true of /da, 
di,dooi/ 'this, that, these, those'. 

da walad kuwayyis. 'This is a good boy.' 

dool awlaad kuwayyisiin. 'These are good boys.' 

da ktaab kuwayyis. 'This is a good book.' 

dool kutub kuwayyisiin. 'These are good books.' 

di kutub kwayyisa. 'These are good books.' 


ifkit icifk itiiit 


ADJECTIVE : RELATIVE 

( See : Nisba Adjective ) 


*** *** 


ADJECTIVE : RELATIVE CLAUSES 

A sentence may be embedded (q.v.) in the adjectival slot of another 
sentence, provided that the two sentences contain an identical noun 
( the "shared noun" ). 

If the shared noun functions as subject in the sentence to be em¬ 
bedded, that noun is deleted when the two sentences are combined. In 



EGVmM ARABIC 


31 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


the following examples, the second sentence of each set is the one 
to be embedded; the third sentence results from the embedding 
transformation. 

irraagil safibi. 'The man is my friend.' 

* irraagiI gamb ilbaab. 'The man is by the door.' 

= irraagil ill i gamb ilbaab safibi. 'The man by the door is my 

friend.' 

?abilt raag i I. 'I met a man.' 

^ irraaqiI rigi? min masr imbaarifi. 'The man returned from Egypt 

yesterday.' 

= ?abilt raagi I rigi? min masr 'I met a man who returned frcwti 

imbaa rift. Egypt yesterday.' 


If the shared noun does not function as subject in the sentence to 
be embedded, that noun is replaced by a pronoun when the two sentences 
are combined : 


issitt mudarrisa. 
fariid itkallim Tan issit^. 

im 


'The lady is a teacher.' 

'Farid talked about the lady.' 
'The lady about whom Farid 
talked is a teacher.' 


issitt iI I i fariid itka 
Tanha mudarrisa. 

Notice that the relative clause must be preceded by iI I i when the 
modified noun is definite, and that iI Ii does not occur when the 
modified novm is indefinite. 

( See also : Relative Clauses with i11 i ) 


AOl/ERB 


A word or phrase used to modify a verb, an adjective, or another 
adverb. Examples of Egyptian Arabic adverbs are /hina/ 'here', 
/hinaak/ 'there', /bisurTa/ 'immediately, quickly', /biiweel/ 
slowly, softly'. 


*** 


ititit 


Icitit 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


32 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


APVERBS 


In EA, there is a relatively small set of words — called adverbs -- 
which function as modifiers of verbs, adjectives and other adverbs, 
but which do not have the inflectional properties of adjectives. For 
example, while kibiir , an adjective, has both a feminine singular 
form and a plural form, bukra 'tomorrow*, an adverb, is invariable in 
form. 

Adverbs may be divided into two large classes: those which usually 
precede and those which usually follow the modified expression. In the 
following papagraphs, the most common adverbs of both types are listed. 
Several s’jb-classes are given, and each sub-class is followed by illus¬ 
trative sentences. 

1. Adverbs which usually follow the modified expression 

(a) Adverbs of place: barra 'outside', quwwa 'inside', 
foo? 'up, upstairs', tafit 'down, downstairs', ?uddaam 
'in the front', wara 'in the back', hina 'here', hinaak 
'there*. 

fSayzaakir guwwa, 'He will study inside.' 

Fianitlaabil hinaak. 'We will meet there.' 

Cb) Adverbs of time: i nnaharda 'today', imbaari Fi 'yester¬ 
day', bukra 'tomorrow', dilwa?ti 'now', ba?deen 'later on', 
zamaan 'a long time ago', ?urayyib 'a short time ago, re-^ 
cently, soon', dayman 'always', abadan 'never.' ( in negative 
sentences only ), badri 'eeirly', waxri 'late', axiiran 'finally', 
aFiyaanan ' sometimes *, sa baa Ban ' in the morning', ma saa?an ' in 
the evening'. 

mil haruuR ?abadan. 'I will never go.' 

hayirga? bukra. 'He will return tomorrow.' 

Cc) Adverbs indicating degree or quantity: ?awi 'very', 
xaaIis 'very' ( in affirmative sentences ); at all ( in ne¬ 
gative sentences )', qiddan 'very', kitiir 'a lot', kamaan 
'more, in addition', ta?riiban 'nearly', liwayya 'a little. 


somewhat *. 



EGVmAN ARABIC 


33 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


zi?il xaalis. 'He became very unhappy.' 

ma^rafuuS xaal is. 'I do not icnow him at all.' 

?aawiz talaata kamaan. 'I want three more.' 
iddinya bard Iwayya. 'It's a bit cold.' 

(d) Adverbs of manner : kida 'in this manner', ?awaam 
'quickly, fast', sawa 'together', waRd- or I iwaRd- 
( plus a pronominal suffix ) 'alone', duyri 'straight 
ahead', tawwaaIi 'straight ahead', famdan 'intentionally*, 
rufit l-waRdi. 'I went alone.' 

raaFiit I iwafidaha. 'She went alone.' 

laazim tim§i diiyri ~ 'You must walk straight ahead.' 
laazim timii tawwaaI i 

2. Adverbs which usually precede the modified expression 

(a) Adverbs indicating approximation : RawaaI i , yiiqi , 
yi tla? , all translatable by 'nearly'. 

iStayal it hina yiigi 'She worked here for about 
TaSar sini in. ten years.' 

(b) Intensifiers ; lissa 'just', yadoob 'just', 9umr 
'ever ( used in negative and interrogative sentences, in 
construct with a following noun or pronoun functioning as 
sxibject ) '. 


I issa rayha. 

?umr 9a Ii daras fi 
gam?it iIqaahira ? 
9umri ma luft masr. 
yadoobu gah wana 
daxia. 


'she has just left.' 

'Has Ali ever studied at the 
University of Cairo ?' 

'I have never seen Egypt.' 
'He had just come when I 
entered.' 


Prepositional phrases frequently occur in adverbial slots. Those 
functioning as time adverbials often begin with fi 'in', ba9d 
'after', or ?abl 'before'. Those functioning as place adverbials 
are often introduced by fi 'in'. Tala 'on', barra 'outside', 
guwwa 'inside', foo? 'on top of, taRt 'under, below', ?uddaam 
'in front of, or wara 'behind'; and those functioning as manner 




EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


34 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


adverbials are often introduced by 'with, in'. 

?abiltaha ba?d ligtimaa?. 'l met her after the meeting.' 
binti guwwa I beet. 'My daughter is inside the house.' 

biyaakul bisurTa. 'He eats.fast (literally "with speed"), 

matfiibbiniiS biiSakl da. 'Do not love me in this meuiner !' 

As stated above, some adverbs usually precede while others usually 
follow the modified expression. This does not mecin, however, that 
every adverb is restricted to one position. Of the ones listed above, 
the following adverbs are usually restricted to one position, while 
the rest may occur in either position : 

abadan , badri , waxri , ?awi , xaaIis , . giddan , yadoob , 
?umr , adverbs of manner, adverbs of probability and doubt, adverbs of 
approximation. 

Placing a given adverb in the non-favored position usually serves 
the purpose of emphasizing that adverb : 

rigiT imbaarifi. 'He returned yesterday.' 

imbaarifi rigi?. 'It was yesterday that he returned.' 

*** *** *** 

ADVERBS OF MANNER 

Notice that some adverbs of manner are of the form : 



bi + 

Noun 


sur9a 

'swiftness' 

bisurTa 

' quickly' 

suhuu la 

'ease' 

bisuhuuia 

'easily' 

su?uuba 

'difficulty' 

bi suYuuba 

'with difficulty' 


The adverb biSwees 'slowly' is of this form but there is no 
corresponding noun from vdiich it is formed. 


ititit 




itiHt 




EGyVTJAN ARABIC 


35 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


AFFIX 

A term used to refer to prefixes ( e.g., /bl-/f /n>i”/» /yi”f ti-, 
a-, ni-/ ), infixes (e.g., gama? 'to collect' emd igtamaf 'to gather 
together', vrtiere the /-t-/ is an infix ), and suffixes ( e.g., /-iin/, 
/-aat/, /-een/ as in fal laFi 'farmer (m)' —— fal laFii in 'farmers (mp) ' 
and fal laafia ' 'farmer (f) '- fa I I afaat 'farmers (fp) ’ ). 

*** *** *♦* 

AGREEMENT IN CONSTRUCT PHRASES 

Construct Phrases + N2 = the N-j^ of N2 

(a) definite , if N2 is definite 

kitaab ilwalad 'the boy's book* 

kitaab Ilwalad Ilkibiir 'the book of the big boy' 

kitaab haani 'Hani's book* 

or (b) indefinite , if N2 is indefinite 

kitaab walad 'a boy's book' 

In either case the construct phrase consists of two nouns + N2 
in a sequence mecining of N2. Note that N^ is definite in meaning , 
but caimot be definite in form ; N2 may or may not be definite. 

In example (a), of N2 + adjective ilkibiir is a modifier of 
N2 ilwalad and therefore agrees with it in definiteness, gender, and 
ntnnber. 

{ See. also ; Adjective : Agreement with Nouns; Adjective : Gender ) 

*** *** *** 

ALLOMORPH 

A positional variant of a morphene (q.v.) occuring in a specific 




EGWTIAN ARABIC 


36 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


environment. English has a noun plural moorpheme /-z/ that has the 
phonologically conditioned allomorphs /-s ” -z “ - z/ as in ’cats', 
•dogs’, 'kisses'. In Egyptian Arabic the connector wj_ 'and' has the 
allomorphs /«*•/ after a vowel and /wi-/ after a consonant, e.g., 
daxia wxarga 'Going in and coming out (f) ' 

daxal wixarag 'He went in smd came out' 

*** *** •** 


ALLOPHONE 


A positional variant of a phoneme (q.v.) , occtiring in specific 
environments and not causing semantic differentiation, e.g., English 
initial [ k** 1 in "kay" and [ k ] following /s/ in ''ski" are both 
members of one and the same phoneme /k/. The only difference between 
them is that the first is aspirated vdiereas the second is unaspirated 
( see : Aspiration ). In Egyptian Arabic /a/ has the allophones 
la] as in English 'fat* and [ a ] as in English 'father' in the 
environments of non-emEhatic (q.v.) and emphatic consonants respect¬ 
ively, e.g., /tab/ ■ [ tab ] 'to repent' and /tab/ = [ tab ] 'to 
ripen*. 

*** iklt* 

ALVEOLAR 


The place of articulation at the alveolar ridge, where /t d s z 1 r r/ 
are produced. 


*** *** *** 


ALVEOLAR RIDGE 

The convex portion of the mouth just behind the front teeth; the tooth 
ridge. 




*** 


*** 





EGYPTIM ARABIC 


37 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


ALVEOPALATAL 

A place of articulation consisting of the front part of the palate: 

/ti/. 

•kicit kitit kkk 

ANAPiyCTIC mEL 

( See : Vowels : Extra ) 

*** *** *** 

MJAPTVXIS 

The addition of an anaptyctic or helping vowel to break up a 
sequence of three consonants ( CCC ), which is inadmissable in Egyptian 
Arabic. 

Utkit kkk kkk 

ANTECEVEUT 

A typical relative clause construction contains three elanents : 

(a) an antecedent 

(b) the invariable relative pronoun iI Ii 

(c) a clause 
Examples : 


luft 

i 1wilaad 

il i I 

gaabu Igawabaat. 


(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

I saw 

the boys 

who 

(they) brought the letters 


(a) 

(b) 

(c) 


Note that the relative clause by itself is a complete sentence, i.e. 
it can stand by itself without the relative pronoun : qaabu Iqawabaat 



EGyniAN ARABIC 


38 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


•They brought the letters.', /-u/, the inflection of the verb 
gaabu , is the formal reference to the antecedent i Iwi laad 'the 
boys *. In the sentence : 

da Igawaab illi gabuuh tmbaarifi. 

'This is the letter which they brought yesterday.' 

- the suffixed pronoun object of the verb gabuuh 'they brought if 
refers to the antecedent. 

In the sentence : 

da Iwalad Illi ktaabu daa?. 

'This is the boy whose ( his ) book got lost.' 

- the suffixed pronoun on kitaab is the reference. 

In the sentence ; 

feen llkitaab illi ?ultilak taleeh ? 

'^ere is the book which I teOked to you about ( it ) ?' 

- the reference is through the suffixed pronoun object of the prep¬ 
osition ta I eeh 'about it'. 

Note that the above examples have definite ^ultecedents. If the 
antecedent is indefinite, there is no relative pronoun in the construct¬ 
ion . 

raagil sakan fimasr sanateen 

'a man who lived in Egypt for two years' 

*** *** *** 


ARABIC 


The most important Sanitic ( q.v. ) language now spoken. It is the 
official language of Algeria, Bahrain, Chad, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Libya, MiULi, McLLta, Mauritania, Morocco, Qatar, Saiodi Arabia, 
Somalia, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Yemen, Democratic Yemen, Oman and 
the United Arab Emirates. Arabic is spoken by 100 million people. It 
is the religious language of 650 million Muslims. 

Arabic is both a modem language and an ancient one, going back 
over 2,000 yeaurs. Classical Arabic is the language of the Holy 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


39 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Koran and the vehicle of Arabic literature. It is universally acknow¬ 
ledged as the standard form of the language and is used in writing and 
speeches. Standard Arabic, also called Modern Standard Arabic is mil- 
form all over the Arab World and is the language of education, the press, 
radio and TV as well as public lectures. In addition, an Arabic dialect 
is spoken in each of the Areib countries and varies to some extent from 
one Arab country to another. Arabists recognize two major dialect 
groups; "Western" aiwi "Eastern"; the Western includes the Arab countries 
of North Africa through Libya and Malta, and the Eastern includes Egypt 
and all the Arab countries of the East. 

*** *** *** 

ARTICLE ; VARIATION Of DEFINITE ARTICLE 

( See : Definite Article : Form; and Definite Article : Meaning ) 

ititit it-kit kkk 


ARTICULATION 

a. ."goint of Articulation" ; The point of contact ( or closest approach ) 
of a speech organ to a part of the mouth or throat during the pro¬ 
duction of a sound. For example, in making the Egyptian consoncuit 
/t/, the apex of the tongue touches the back of the upper teeth; 
the point of articulation is referred to as dental . ( Note that 
the English /t/ is slightly different : the apex of the tongue 
touches the alveolar ridge behind the upper teeth; the English /t/ 
is thus classed as alveolar ). 

Points of Articulation ( A peurticular speech organ is generally 
associated with each point of articulation. ) 

1. Bilabial : lower lip and upper lip / p b m w / 

2. Labiodental : lower lip and upper teeth / f v / 

3. Dental : apex of tongue and upper teeth / t d S 2 n 1 / 

Alveolar : apex of tongue and alveolar ridge /tdszlrr/ 


4. 




BSYFUAN ARABIC 


40 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


5. Alveopalatal ; blade of tongue and front part of palate / | z / 

6. Palatal : tongue blade and pcd.ate / y / 

7. Velar : tongue dorsun and back of palate /kg/ 

8. Back-Velar ( also "Post velar" ) s tongue dorsum and velum / x ^ / 

9. Ovular : tongue dorsum and uvula / q / 

10. Pharyngeal ; root of tongue suid pharynx forming a stricture 

/ fi ? / 

11. Glottcd. : produced in the glottis ( opening at upper part of 
the leurynx between the vocal cords ) / ? h / 

The sound /V/ glottal stop is produced by con^lete closure and 
release of the vocal cords. 

b. Manner of articulation : The way in which the air passage is 
blocked or constricted during the production of a sound. For 
example, the lower and upper lips may form a complete closinre, 
thus stopping the air flow, as in the case of a /b/ which is termed 
stop . 

Manners of articulation 

1. Stop : refers to consonants cluuracterized by a complete 
closure of the air passage, thus blocking the air stream 
momentarily, e.g., closing of both lips in production of /b/s 
/pbttddkgq?/ 

2. Fricative : refers to consonants produced by friction caused 

by the air moving through a narrowed passage in the vocal tract: 
/fvsszzSixyfi ? h / _ 

,{ Mote : The term "Obstruent" includes Stops and Fricatives. ) 

3. Masai : refers to consonants produced with the uvula lowred, 
allowing the air to excape through the nose, so that the nasal 
cavity acts as a resonator: / tn n / 

4. Lateral : refers to a consonant produced with the tongue touch¬ 
ing only the middle of the palate, thus allowing the air flow 
to excape around one or both sides of the tongue: /II/ 

5. Flap ; refers to a consonant produced by a single tap of the 
tongue in which the tip of the tongue makes a single rapid 
contact against the alveolar ridge: / r r / 

( Note : A Trill is a double Flap: / rr rr / ) 




EGYniAN ARABIC 


41 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


6 . Semi-vowel ; a vowel-like sound which functions as a con¬ 
sonant / w y / • Also often referred to as "Glides", 

ititit Hrilr* iritit 


ASPECTUAL-TEMPORAL FORMS 

( See : Verb ; Aspect ; and Verb ; Tense ) 

*** "kifk -kitic 


ASPIRATION 

The puff of breath after a consonant, e.g., /\/ in English "top" 
is aspirated where that of English "stop" is unaspirated . Egyptian 
Arabic /t/ is also aspirated initially, e.g., 

/taani/ = [ t*'ce$ni ] 'again' 

kitk kkit kkit 


ASSIMILATION 

Assimilation is a phonetic process whereby a given sound acquires 
one or more characteristics of an adjacent soiind or becomes identical 

to it, e.g., /xad/ + /t/-> /xatt/ 'I took'. 

Another important instance of assimilation in EA is that of the /!/ 
of the definite article /iI-/ when followed by one of the consonant 
phonemes /ttddrrsszzS^n 1 /. Assimilation of the definite 
article is optional when followed by either /k/ or /g/. 

/raagil/ 'man', /il/ + /raagi 1/->/irraagil/ 'the man' 

In the following sequences : /td, sz, IX/, assimilates to only 

with respect to voice. -— 

/ustaaz/ 'professor'-> /asatza/ 


> /asadza/ 'professor' . 







EGyVTIAN ARABIC 


42 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


/xad/ 'to take'-> /xadt/ -/xatt/ 'I took' 

/?ooda/ 'room' -> /?odti / -/?ott i/ 'my room' 

Note in the last example assimilation with respect to emphasis; /t/—^ /\/• 
C1C2 Utterance Medially and Finally 


Sequences of any two obstruents ( i.e. stops or fricatives ) are 
usually both voiced or both voiceless. Here assimilates to C2 
with respect to voice. 


/xaragt/ -■> /xarakt/ 'I went out' 

/lafazt/ -/ lafasy 'I pronounced' 

/fuzt/ -> /fust/ 'I succeeded' 


In sequences of a voiceless obstruent + /r/ or /!/, the latter 
assimilates to the obstruent with respect to voice; this is true 


utterance finally only ( 5 = devoiced consonant 



train 

Catl 

povind 


a lock 

?asr 

• 0 

palace 

naSr 

0 

publication 


The sequence C1C2 initially is very rare; e.g. 
'good', /braavo/ 'bravo'. 


) , ® • 9 *■ / 


/kwayyis ~ kuwayyis/ 


*** itifk itieit 

ASSIMILATION : /-I-/OF VEFINITE ARTICLE 

(a) Assimilation of /-!-/ of the definite article to the following 
consonants :/ttddsszzSznrr/is obligatory , e.g., 
/lyaalib/ 'the student', but /ilwalad/ 'the boy'. 

(b) Assimilation of /-I-/ of the definite article to / k g / is 
optional in EA. 

/ilkursi/ ~ /ikkursi/ 'the chair' 

/rig idiid/ ~ /iggidiid/ 'the new' 

The form of the definite article is /I-/ rather than /i I-/ when it 
follows a word ending in a vowel, e.g.. 










EGyPTIAN ARABIC 


43 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


/'rttaah'Kba Igidiida/ 'the new student' 

This form of the definite article is also subject to the assimilation 
rules stated in (a) <uid (b) above, e.g., 

/ittaal iba nnabiiha/ 'the intelligent student' 
/ilkursi Igidiid/ ~ 'the new chair' 

/Ikkursi ggidiid/ 

*** *** 


ASSIMILATION OF OBSTRUENTS 

1 . An obstruent is either a stop ( e.g., /b/, /t/, /k/ ) or a 
fricative ( e.g., /f/, /s/, /y/ ). In a cluster of obstruents 
which is pronounced at normal conversational speed , the two 
constituent consonants are either both voiced or both voiceless. 
The formation of the word or the juxtaposition of words may bring 
together two obstruents, one of which is voiced and the other 
voiceless; when this takes place, the first obstruent changes to 
match the second in voicing unless such assimilation would oblit¬ 
erate the contrast between lexical items : 


yidfiak (root: dftk) -> /yitfiak/ 'he laughs' 

agsaad (root: gsd) -> /aksaad/ 'bodies' 

naas + zayyak -> /naz zayyak/ 'people like you' 


Notice, however, that no such assimilation takes place in 
taFidi id 'specification; and a?tirif 'I confess'; this is to 
keep the words in question distinct from taTdiid 'mourning' and 
aftt!r if '1 practice ( a profession )' respectively. 

2 . When two different sibilants aire brought together, the first is 
totally assimilated to the second : 


mi§ + zayyi -> /miz zayyj/ 'not like me' 

?aa 5 Sana -> /?as sana/ 'he lived for a year' 


In EA, the sibilants are /s/, /s/, /z/, /z/, / 2 / and / 5 /. 

3 . When the suffixed -ha and -hum are added to forms ending in 








EGyPTlAM ARABIC _44_ REFERENCE GRAMWR 

/x/z /y/z /fi/z or A/z the resultant consonant cluster \indergoes the 
following changes in the order given ; 

Ca) The first consonant becomes voiceless ( if not already 
voiceless ) to match the second. 

Cb) The second consonant ( i.e., the /h/ ) becomes identical 
to the first. 

dawwax + -hum - /dawwaxxum/ 'He made them dizzy.' 

roofi + -ha - /rohha/ 'her spirit' 

dimaay + -ha - /dimaxxa/ 'her head' (after shortening 

long vowel) 

yinfa? + -hum - /ylnfafihum/ 'He benefits them.' 

The assimilations discussed above are totally predictable; partly 
for that reason, and partly because it is desirable to indicate 
what the root consonants arez the transcription does not normally 
show these assimilations. 

*** *** *** 


AUKiLuny 


C See ; Verb ; Auxiliaries ) 




EGYVnAH AHABIC 


45 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


BACK VOWEL 

To produce a vowel souiid, the tongue is arched High > Mid , or lov 
in the mouth. The arching of the tongue is either toward the Front 
of the palate or the Back. Thus, we describe the vowels in terms of 
these two parameters. We c«m, for example, say that EA /!/ is a 
high front vowel, EA /a/ is a low back vowel and EA /u/ is a high 
back vowel. 

*** *** **■* 

BILABIAL 

A place of articulation consisting of the lower and upper lips ; 

/ p b m w /. 


*** 









EGWTTAN ARABIC 


47 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 



CLAUSE : RELATIVE CLAUSE 

( See : Relative Clauses with HI! ) 

*** *** *** 

CLAUSE : STRUCTURE (UITH DEMONSTRATIVES 

da (ms) 'this, 'that'; ^ (fs) 'this,that'; and dool (p) 
'these, those* may preceed or follow a noun or adjective with conse¬ 
quent significant differences in clausal structure : 

They may stand alone as the subject of a sentence : 

(a) da walad kibiir "This is a big boy.' 

(b) da kbiir 'This is big.' 

Or they may follow a definite noun to form a phrase meaning 
"this ....:" 

ilwalad da kbiir 'This boy is big.' 


*** 




*** 





EGWriAN ARABIC 


48 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


COGNATE ACCUSATIVE CONSTRUCTWhl 


There are two cognate accusative constructions in EA : 

1 . The first construction consists of a verb or an adjective 
followed by a verbal noun from the same root. The verbal 
noun is pronounced at a slower rate than the preceding words; 
moreover, the verbal noun is pronounced with a relatively 
high pitch and is followed by a sustained terminal juncture. 
In the following examples, the intonation is represented by a 


line 


darabuu I darb 



ilbint di Bilwa I Ralaawa. 


'They beat him so^ viciously 
' I ate ^ much !' 

'This girl is so pretty I' 


I • 


As can be seen from the examples, this construction signals 
strong aaphasis. 

2 . The second construction consists of the following elenents 
in the order given : 

(a) A verb or an adjective, 

(b) A verbal noun from the same root, and 

(c) An expression modifying the verbal noun. The intonational 
peculicurities which characterize the first construction are not 
applicable here. 

/nimt noom yaw• it/ slept soundly ( literally ; "I 

slept a deep sleep” }.' 

/yaab yeeba tawiiia/ 'He was absent for a long time ( liter- 

eilly : "He was absent a long absence" }.' 
/Ilbint dl gam ilia 'This girl is beautifxil to a dazzling 
gamaal yigannin/ degree.' 

As the examples show, this construction specifies the type of 
tdiatever is designated by the verb or the adjective. The 
corresponding English expression is often an adverb of degree 
or nuuiner. 




**• 


*** 




EGVTTIAN ARABIC 


49 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


COLLECnVE NOUNS 

A collective is a noun that designates a glass or mass of like 
things without counting the units that make up the mass. Things that 
can be measured or counted, like fruits and vegetables, have collect- 
ive nouns as well as unit nouns and their plurals. Other things 
that can only be measured, like sugar zuid tea have only collective 
nouns. Things that can be counted or referred to as a group or 
"species", like trees, fish, sheep, also have collective nouns, unit 
nouns and their plurals. 

A look at tuffaafi 'apples', tuffaafia 'an apple' and tuffafiaat 
'apples', shows that tuffaafia 'an apple' ( here termed Dnit Noun ) 
is derived from tuffaafi 'apples' ( here termed Collective Noun ) 
by the suffixation of the feminine suffix /-a/, and that tuffafiaat 
'apples' ( here termed Count Plural , i.e., the plural used after 
ntmierals 3-10 ) is derived from the unit noun by suffixation of 
/-aat/, like any other feminine plTiral. There are some collective 
nouns which form their unit noun by suffixing /-aaya/ and their 
count plural by suffixing /-ayaat/, e.g., 

manga 'mangos' r mangaaya 'a mango'? mangayaat 'mangos' 

xass 'lettuce'? xassaaya 'a head of lettuce'? xassayaat 'heads of lettuce' 

tamaat im 'tomatoes'? tamatmaaya 'a tomato*? tamatmayaat 'tomatoes' 

iiiit ititit 


CONVmONAL SENTENCES 

There are two types of conditional sentences : the simple, and the 
hypothetical. 

A simple conditional sentence lays down a condition and states a 
result : the condition must be fulfilled before the result czm take 
place, but the crucial fact is that both the condition and the result 


can occur. 




EGVFnAM ARABIC 


50 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


A hypothetical sentence also lays down a condition and states a 
dependent result; the distinctive characteristic of this sentence is 
that the condition does not take place, and for that reason the 
result is not possible. 

Of the following pair, the first is a simple conditional sentence 
vdiile the second is a hypothetical conditional sentence : 

iza raafi fiaruufi ma?aah. 'if he goes, I will go with him.' 

law kaan fiayruufi kunt 'If he were going to go, I would 

aruufi ma?aah. go with him.' 

Co nditional sentences ( simple as well as hypothetical ) enccaapass 
a large number of possible structures, auid different speakers have 
different preferences. The rules given below define the most common 
usages. It is assumed that the condition and the result are derived 
from corresponding "source" sentences. Thus it is assumed that law 
raafi fiaruufi magaah 'If he goes, I will go with him' has two source 
sentences : huwwa fiayruufi 'He will go', and ana fiaruufi ' 1 will 

go with him'; it is also aissumed that law kaan fiayruufi kunt aruufi 
ma?aah 'if he were going to go, I would go with him' has the same 
source sentences. 

Some widespread variations are described after the rules. 

A. Simple Conditional Sentences 

Condition Result 

Derived frcm the source sentence 
in the following manner : 

1. A conditional conjunction is No cheuige in the source sentence, 
added in sentence-initial posit¬ 
ion. The conjunction is usually 

iza 'if', but the synonymous 
conjunction in may also be used. 

2. The constituent "Perfect" is 
oblicatorily added before the 
verb. If the source sentence is 
equational, "Perfect" is added 
after the conjunction. The con¬ 
stituent "Perfect" is realized 



EGVmAN ARABIC 


51 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


as- a perfect fora of kaan (e.g., 
kaan , kunt , kaan It , etc.) in an 
equational condition clause. 

3. A future verb and a preceding 
perfect form of kaan are scrae- 
times kept unchanged and some¬ 
times replaced by a perfect 
verb : the replacement takes 
place if the Fia- of the verb 
in question indicates simple 
futurity; no clumge takes place 
if the fia- indicates a future 
intention. Thus Iza + kaan + 
fiavruufi yields : 

(a) iza raafi ‘if he goes', or 

(b) iza kaan fiavruufi 'if he is 
going to go' 

B. Hypothetical Sentences 
Condition 

Derived from the source sentence 
in the following manner : 

1. The hypothetical conjunction 
law 'if is added in sentence- 
initial position. 


2. The constituent "Berfect" 
is optionally added before 
the verb. If the source sen¬ 
tence is equational, "Perfect" 
is added after the conjvinction. 
"Berfect" is realized as a 
perfect form of kaan (e.g., 
kunt , kaanit , kaan , kaanu , 
etc.). 


Result 

Derived from the source sentence 

in the following manner : 

1. The constituent "Perfect" is 
obligatorily added before the 
verb. If the source is equation¬ 
al, "Perfect" is added in 
initial position. "Perfect" 

is -realized as a perfect form 
of kaan (e.g., kunt , kaanit , 
kaan , kaanu , etc.). 

2. A perfect verb in the source 
sentence is left unaltered; an 
imperfect verb with an aspect 
prefix is replaced by the cor¬ 
responding subjionctive form. 

If the source is equational, 
the subjunctive form to be used 
is yikuun (usually occuring 
after the subject). The pres- 




EGVmnAN ARABIC 


52 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


ence of the siibjunctive form 
signals the meaning 'not pos- 

_ ^ihle, not attainable'. 

3. If the source sentence has 

kaan , the addition of "Perfect" 
would produce the sequence 
kaan kaan (e.g., law kaan kaan 
t Mmi iz for 'if it were true 
that he used to be a student') 

This is avoided by : 

(a) Exercising the option of 
not adding “Perfect", or 

(b) Rephrasing; e.g., law 
kaan safiilfi innu kaan 

t ilmllz 'if it were true 
that he used to be a 
student*. 

Note : 

In simple as well as hypothetical conditional sentences, the carrier 
of "Perfect" may exchange positions with the subject of the clause; 
thus (b) in each of the following pairs is a structural paraphrase of 
(a) ; 

(a) law kaan ?al i raafi, kaan mlFammad ?ablu. 

'Had Ali gone, Mohammed would have met him.' 

(b) law Tali kaan raafi, mifiammad kaan ?ablu. 

(a) iza kaan Tali hina, ismafili a?ablu. 

'If Ali is here, allow me to see him.' 

(b) iza Tali kaan hina, ismafili a?ablu. 

The following examples illustrate the application of the rules. In 
each case, the source sentences are given : the source sentence for 
the condition is ladselled (a), and the source sentence for the result 
is laibelled (b). Each source sentence is accompanied by very brief 
comments on the required transformations ( no comments are included 
on the addition of conjunctions ). The conditional sentence which 
results from combining the output of (a) and (b) is labelled (c). 
Optional constituents are enclosed in parentheses. 




EGVVTIAN ARABIC 


53 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


A. Simple Conditional Sentences 

1. (a) raafi iI beet. 

Add kaan before raafi . 

(b) maruBtil mS'aah leeh ? 

(c) iza/in kaan raafi i I beet, 
marufitiS ma?aah leeh ? 

2. (a) bit Idris ingiliizi 

f iggamfa d i. 

Add kaanit before 
bit idr is . 

(b) Fia?abilha fyoom 
mii?ayyaam. 

(c) iza/in kaanit bitidris 
ing i I iizi figgamTa di, 
F>a?abilha fyoom mil?ayyaam. 

3. (a) biti?ri ktaab kull yoom. 

Add kunti before biti?r i . 

(b) fiatxal, [asi Ikutub di 
f?usbuu?. 

(c) iza/in kunti bti?ri ktaab 
kull yoom, Ratxallasi 

Ikutub di f?usbuu?. 

4. (a) BatirgaYu ?abl idduhr. 

Add kuntu before fiat irga?u . 
Keep kuntu fiat irgaTu 
unchanged to indicate future 
intention; replace it by 
r iqi?tu to indicate simple 
futurity. 

(b) ittisilu biyya. 

(c) iza/in kuntu fiatirgaTu ?abl 
idduhr, ittisi lu biyya. 
iza/in rigiftu ?abl idduhr 
itt isilu biyya. 


' He went home.' 

'Why didn't you go with him ?' 

' If he went home, why didn't 
you go with him ?' 

'She is studying English at 
this university.' 

' I will meet her someday.' 

' If she is studying English at 
this university, I will meet 
her someday.' 

'You (fs) are reading a book 
a day.' 

'You (fs) will complete (reading) 
these books in a week.' 

'If you are reading a book a day, 
you will complete (reading) 
these books in a week.' 

'You (p) are going to return 
before noon.' 


'Get in touch with me.' 

'If you are going to return 
before noon, get in touch with me.' 
'If you return before noon, get 
in touch with me.' 


EGmUN ARABIC 


54 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


5. (a) awlaadak ta?baniin. 

Add kaanu before awlaadak . 

(b) xa I I iikum hina. 

(c) iza/in kaanu awlaadak 
ta9baniin, xalI iikum hina. 


'Your children are tired.' 

' Stay here.' 

'If your children are tired, 
stay here.' 


B. Hypothetical Sentences 


1. (a) raah ilmadrasa. 

Add kaan optionally before 
raafi . 

(b) ruFit maTaah. 

Add kunt before rufit . 

(c) law (kaan) raah ilmadrasa 
kunt ruFit m?aah. 

2. (a) biyidris ingiliizi. 

Add kaan optionally before 
biyidris . 

(b) fihim ilI i ana ?ultu. 

Add kaan before f ihim . 

(c) law (kaan) biyidris 

ingiI i izi kaan fihim iI I i 
ana ?ultu. 

3. (a) ftayruuFiu masr. 

Add kaanu optionally 
before hayruuFiu . 

(b) ?a i u I na. 

Add kaanu before ?aIuIna . 

(c) law (kaanu) hayruufiu masr 
kaanu ?alulna. 

4. (a) kariim biyiktib maqaala 

ku I I usbuu?. 

Add kaan optionally before 


'He went to school.' 

'1 went with him.' 

'If he had gone to school, I 
would have gone with him.' 

'He is studying English.' 

'He understood what I said.' 

'If he were indeed studying 
English, he would have under¬ 
stood what I said.' 

'They will go to Egypt.' 

'They told us.' 

'If they were going to go to 
Egypt they would have told us. 
'Karim writes an article every 
week.' 


b i y i kt i b . 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


55 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


(b) 

(c) 


5. (a) 


(b) 


(c) 


6. (a) 


(b) 


(c) 


7. (a) 


(b) 


(c) 


ba?a maShuur. 

Add kaan before ba?a . 
law kariim (kaan) biyiktib 
maqaala kull usbuu? kaan 
ba?a maShuur. 
raafiu min yeer izn. 

Add kaanu optionally before 
raaRu . 

Taqibtuhum biSidda. 

Add kunt before ?aqibtuhum . 
law (kaanu) raafiu min yeer 
izn kunt Taqibtuhum bisidda. 

asfiaabak f ihmu Iwad9. 

Add kaanu optionally before 
f ihmu . 

biyitkallimu kalaam yeer da 
Add kaanu before biy ! tkaI I imu 
and replace biyitkalIimu by 
its bare counterpart, 
law asfiaabak (kaanu) fihmu 
IwadT kaanu yitkallimu 
kalaam yeer da. 
sim?u kalaamak. 

Add kaanu optionally before 
simfu . 

fiayathum gaftiim. 

Add kaanit in initial 
position, and add tikuun 
after Fiayathum . 
law (kaanu) sim?u kalaamak 
kaan it fiayathum tikuun 
gafiiim. 


' He became famous.' 

'If Karim wrote an article 
every week, he would have 
become famous.' 

'They went without pentiission.' 

'I punished them severely.' 

'If they had gone without 
permission, I would have 
punished them severely.' 

'Your friends understand the 
situation.' 

'They speak differently.' 


'If your friends had understood 
the situation, they would have 
spoken differently.' 

'They heeded your advice.' 

'Their life is hell.' 


'If they had heeded your advise 
their life would now be hell.' 




EGVmAN ARABIC 


56 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


8 . 


(a) Fiiseen Tayyaan. 

Add kaan optionally before 
IS i seen . 

(b) abuuk ittasal bidduktoor. 
Add kaan before ittasa I . 

(c) law (kaan) fiiseen Tayyaan 
kaan abuuk ittaa I 
bidduktoor. 


'Hussein is sick.' 

'Your father contacted the 
doctor.' 

'If Hussein were sick, your 
father would have contacted 
the doctor.' 


English employs a contrast which must be taken into consideration here. 
Compare the following sentences : 

(a) If you visit Egypt, you'll change many of yotir opinions about 
the Egyptian people. 

(b) If you visited Egypt, you'd change many of your opinions about 
the Egyptian people. 

Both sentences are non-hypothetical, and thus both correspond to 
Arabic sentences of the type we have called "simple conditionals". 

There is a difference, however, between sentence (a) and sentence (b) : 
visiting Egypt and the change of opinion which would ensue are con¬ 
sidered less probable in sentence (b) than they are in sentence (a) . 

The point to be stressed is that the difference in question is not 
signalled by the grammatical structure of Arabic conditional sentences; 
instead, the difference is expressed lexically through the use of 
Rasa I inn, fur id inn, or quddir inn ( all translatable by "perchance" ): 


law zurt masr fiatyayyar kitiir 
min araa?ak Yan isSaYb 
iImasri. 

law fiasaI/furid/quddir innak 
zurt masr Ratyayyar kitiir 
min araa?ak Yan iSSaYb 
iImasri. 


'If you visit Egypt, you'll 
change many of your opinions 
about the Egyptian people.' 

'If you visited Egypt, you'd 
change many of your opinions 
about the Egyptian people' 
(literally; "If perchance you 
visit Egypt, you'll change 
many of your opinions about 
the Egyptian people."). 




EGVFnAN ARABIC 


57 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The following are some common variations : 

1. Many Egyptians restrict the use of law to hypothetical sentences; 
the same speakers restrict the use of iza and to simple 
conditional sentences. Some, however, use the three conjunctions 
interchangeably in both types of sentences : 

law/iza/in raafi fiaruufi maTaa. 'If he goes I will go with him.' 

law/iza/in kaan fiayruufi kunt 'If he were going to go I would 

aruufi maTaa. go with him.' 

2. In hypothetical sentences, some use law inn instead of law . The 
word Inn here signals emphasis and frequently occurs with extra 
heavy stress; 

law ?inni makuntil issabab 'If only I were not the cause 

fi mootu, kunt it^azzeet. of his death, 1 would have 

found comfort .' 

3. The invariable form vib?a often introduces the result of a simple 
conditional sentence. The occurrence of yib?a is by no means 
arbitrary, but neither are the rules governing such occurrence 
easily discernible; suffice it to say here that in many ( though 
not all ) instances, yib?a occurs with the meaning 'then it is true, 
then it is a fact that, then it must be a fact that' : 


iza kaan da ra?yak yib?a 
madarastiS ilmawduu? 
kuwayyis. 

iza kaan il?ustaaz kamaan 
muxtalif ma9aaya firra?y, 
yib?a ana yaltaan. 


'If this is your opinion, then 
(it must be a fact that) you 
have not studied the matter 
sufficiently.' 

'If the professor too differs 
with me in opinion, then (it 
must be a fact that) I am 
wrong.' 




EGVFTJAN ARABIC 


58 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


4. Although the condition usually precedes the result, it is possible 
to reverse the order; thus in each of the following pairs, (b) 


is a 

paraphrase of (a) ; 


(a) 

iza rgiTt badri 

'If I return early, I will 


fiadrablak ti1ifoon. 

phone you.' 

(b) 

fiadrablak tilifoon iza 

'I will phone you if I return 


rgiTt badri. 

early.' 

(a) 

law kaan Tandi fluus 

'If I had (enough) money, I 


kunt iltareet ilbeet da. 

would have bought this house,' 

(b) 

kunt iltareet ilbeet da 

'I would have bought this house 


law kaan Tandi fiuus. 

if I had (enough) money.' 


'*4r* 

CONJOINING 


Two sentences may be joined without subordinating one to the other 
— i.e., without using one to fill a slot in the other. Such sen¬ 
tences are said to be "conjoined". Consider the following pair : 


1. Fiasan raafi ilmaktab lamma 
?al i rigi? mi Imadrasa. 

2. Fiasan raafi i Imaktab wi 
Tali rigiT milmadrasa. 


'Hasan went to the office when 
Ali returned from school.' 
'Hasan went to the office and 
Ali returned from school.' 


In example 1, the main sentence may be represented as fiasan raafi 
iImaktab + T where T stands for the adverbial slot Time . The sentence 
Tali riqiT miImadrasa is used as a filler for the slot In 
example 2, the sentences fiasan raafi ilmaktab and Tali rigiT miImadrasa 
are joined together ( by the conjunction ^ ), but neither fills a 
slot in the other. In example 1, then, the sentence TaIi rigiT 
miImadrasa is "embedded" in another sentence, while in example 2, 


fiasan raafi iImaktab and Tali rigiT miImadrasa are "conjoined". 



EGmiAN ARABIC 


59 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


Sometimes the conjoined entities are sentence-like structures 
only on an abstract level. For example, the utterance ftasan wi ?aI i 
byidrisu lluya ITarabivya 'Hasan and Ali are studying the Arabic 
langtiage' gives the impression that the conjoined entities are two 
nouns { liasan and fa I i ) , vdiile this impression is correct on one 
level, it is incorrect on another level. The utterance in question 
may be considered the result of conjoining two sentences { fiasan 
biyidris illuya l^arabiyya and ?ali byidris i lluya ITarabiyya ), 
then deleting the redundant constituents. 

*** *** *** 


COhimCTJONS 

A conjunction is a word which connects words, phrases, clauses, or 
sentences, indicating the relationship of the connected elements. 

Some conjunctions are used for embedding one sentence in another, while 
some are used for conjoining sentences; the former are called 
coordinating conjunctions , and the latter are called subordinating 
conjunctions . Consider the following examples : 


(a) 

fari id 

h i na 

w?al i 

mil 

'Farid 

is 

here 

and Ali is not 


hina. 




here.' 




(b) 

fari id 

h i na 

?a§aa 

n ?al i 

'Farid 

is 

here 

because Ali is 


mi§ hi 

na. 



not.' 





In example (a), the two sentences fariid hina and ?aIi mis hina are 
joined together without using one to fill a slot in the other; the 
conjunction which joins them ( ^ 'and' ) is therefore coordinating. 
In example (b), the sentence TaIi mil hina fills the adverbial slot 
in the sentence fariid hina + R ( where R stands for the adverbial 
slot Reason ); the conjxinction which joins the two sentences ( ?asaan 
'because' ) is therefore subordinating. 

It is often the case that the entities joined by a conjunction are 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


69 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


sentence-like structures on one level but not on another level. For 
example, in (c) below the joined entities { muniira and gamiiI a ) 
are nouns; (c) , however, is derived from (d) where the joined entities 
are clauses : 

(c) muniira wgamiila min 
iskindiriyya. 

(d) muniira min iskindiriyya 
wgamiila min iskindiriyya. 

In regard to the positions where they occur, EA conjunctions are 
divisible into three types : 

1. Conjunctions of Type 1 are those which must occur between the 
joined entities. The majority of such conjunctions are coordi¬ 
nating . Example : 

axuuya duktoor wana mdarris. 'My brother is a doctor, and I 

am a teacher.' 

2. Conjunctions of Type 2 are those which may occur before or 
between the joined entities ( the first position being more 
common ). The majority of such conjunctions are subordinating. 
Example : 

lamma I?ustaa2 daxal, 'when the professor entered, 

ittalamiiz sa??afu. the students applauded.' 

ittaiamiiz sa??afu lamma 'The students applauded when 

l?ustaaz daxal. the professor entered.' 

Notice that when the position of the conjunction changes, the 
order of the joined entities changes accordingly. 

3. Conjunctions of Type 3 are discontinxious forms. The first 
part of a discontinuous conjunction precedes the two joined 
entities, and the second part occurs between them. Example : 

ya t saa 1 i ft xa M i I ya ' Either make up with Khalil or 

tsiibu ffiaalu. leave him alone.' 

Listed below are the most common conjunctions of EA. When two or 
more meanings are given for a conjunction, each meaning is identified 
by a letter. 


'Munira and Garnila are from 
Alexandria.' 

'Munira is from Alexandria and 
Gamila is from Alexandria.' 





EGYPTUN ARABIC 


61 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 



1 . ^ 'and' ; Elements joined by the conjunction ^ must be of 
the same type; for example, two statements may be joined by 
wi but a statement and a question may not. When imperfect 
verbs are joined by the aspect prefix is usually ( though 
not necessarily ) deleted from the second form if the first 
form has the same prefix. The following are examples : 

?abilt il?ustaaz wi 'I met the professor and made 

fiaddidt m?aad ma9a an appointment with the dean.' 

1 9am i i d. 

imtaFiant fiseen wi 'I tested Hussein and Farida.' 

fariida. 

?abiItu wlarafitilu 'I met with him and explained 

Imawduu?. the matter to him.' 

Fia?ablu w(fi)aSrahlu 'I will meet with him and (will) 

Imawduu9. explain the matter to him.' 

igtamafna mbaariR 'We met yesterday and today.' 

winnaharda. 

ruuR wiiraRlu ImawduuT. 'Go and explain the matter to 

him.' 

2. wi birraym min zaaIik ~ wi ma9a zaaI ik 'yet, nevertheless, in 
spite of that' : 

mukayyif ilhawa sayYSSI/ 'The air conditioner is on and 

wi ma9a zaal ik ilRaraara yet the temperatiire is high.' 

9a I ya. 

madarastil, wi birraym min 'l did not study; nevertheless, 
zaalik nagafit I passed the test.' 

fill imt iFiaan. 

biyidris kitiir, wi birraym 'He studies a lot, and in spite 
min zaalik mil ^iyingaR. of that he does not pass.' 

xalliik mu?addab fi 'Be polite in talking with him; 

kalaamak ma9aah, wi ma9a yet make it clear to him that 

zaalik fahhimu nnak you will act on your own 

fiatitsarraf Rasab ra?yak opinion.' 
iIxaasf. 




EGWriAN ARABIC 


62 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


3. 'or' : Sentences joined by are usually of the same type, 
but such sentences are rarely questions ( walla , rather than 
aw , usually joins questions ). 

iftakart innu baa? '1 thought he had sold the car 

il?arabiyya aw rahan or mortgaged the house.' 

i I beet. 

FiaStiri tiffaafi aw ?inab. 'I will buy apples or grapes.' 

fiutt ilkutub filmaktab aw 'Put the books in the office or 
filfasl. in the classroom.' 

4. wala 'nor, rather than; emphatic negative' : This conjvinction 
has two common usages : 

(a) It may replace the uninterrupted sequence w i mil ; thus 
the first sentence of each pair below may be replaced 
by the second member : 

(i) mi5 fawziin ni?abilhum 'We do not want to meet them, 
wi miS ?awziin niSuuf and we do not want to see 

wiiiuhum. their faces.' 

(ii) miS Tawziin ni?abilhum 'We do not want to meet them 
wala ?awziin nisuuf nor do we want to see their 

wilSuhum. faces.' 

(i) iImoot wi mis 'Death (is to be chosen) rather 

ilTubudiyya. than slavery.' 

(ii) iI moot wala l?ubudiyya. 'Death (is to be chosen) rather 
(preferable) than slavery.' 

(b) It replaces wi ma-...-S when emphasis is to be signalled; 
in other words, wala may be interpreted as wi + ma-— -I 

+ Emphasis . Of the following pair, the first sentence does 
not signal emphatic negation while the second one does : 

(i) rigi? wi masa?alS 'He returned, paying no 

fnasiFiitna. attention to our advice.' 

(ii) rigi? wala sa?al fi 'He returned, paying no 

nasifiitna. attention vdiatsoever to our 

advice.' 

As used in sentence (ii)! above, wa I a denotes negation and 
emphasis, which distinguishes this use of wala from the 



EGYPTIM ARABIC 


63 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


use of ma- ( in a sentence which contains ma-, emphasis 
is signalled by an oath particle, by inia jI a , yareet , 
etc., but not by ma- itself. See "Negation : ma^, ..." ) . 

5. walla 'or' ; This conjunction is the counterpart of aw ; as a 
general rule, walla occurs in questions and aw occurs else¬ 


where. 

baa? il?arabiyya walla 
rahan 11 beet ? 
fiat i 5t i r i t i f faafi walla 
?inab ? 

bitidris walla btitfarrag 
?a tt 11 Ifizyoon 
biIleel ? 

6. laakin 'but ( contrast )' ; 

gam?it iskindiriyya 
kbilra, laakin gam?it 
ilqaahira akbar minha. 
katab ilmaqaala laakin 
manaSarhaas. 
fiayruufi iskindiriyya 
laakin mil RayiRdar 
i lmu?tamar. 
imii waraah laakin 
matkaI Iimuul. 

7. bass 'but ( contrast )' ; 
changeable with laakin . 

gam?it iskindiriyya 
kbiira, bass gam?it 
ilqaahira akbar minha 
katab ilmaqaala, bass 
manalarhaaS 
Rayruufi baydaad, bass 
mil RayiRdar 
ilmu?tamar. 


'Did he sell the car or mort¬ 
gage the house ?' 

'Will you buy apples or grapes ?' 

'Do you study or do you watch 
television at night ?' 

'The University of Alexandria is 
large, but the University of 
Cairo is larger.' 

'He wrote the article but he did 
not publish it.' 

'He will go to Alexandria, but 
he will not attend the conference. 

'Follow him, but do not talk to 
him.' 


'The University of Alexandria is 
large, but the University of 
Cairo is larger.' 

'He wrote the cirticle, but he 
did not publish it.' 

'He will go to Baghdad, but he 
will not attend the conference. 


This conjunction is usually inter- 



EGVTTIAN ARABIC 


64 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


imSi waraah bass 'Follow him, but do not talk 

matka11imuul. to him.' 

8- innama 'but { contrast )' : This conjunction is usually inter¬ 
changeable with Iaakin , but it occurs less frequently than 
laakin in a slot v^ich immediately precedes a verb. 

gam?it iskindiriyya 'The University of Alexandria is 

kbiira, innama gam?it large, but the University of 
ilqaahira akbar minha. Cairo is larger.' 
katab ilmaqaala innama 'He wrote the article, but he did 
manaiarhaaS. not publish it.' 

fiayruuR bayclaad, innama 'He will go to Baghdad, but he 
mil RayiRdar will not attend the conference.' 

ilmu?tamar. 

imii waraah innama 'Follow him, but do not talk to 

matka11imuus. him.' 

9. aRsan ~ laRsan ~ 

(a) 'lest' : The conjunction is translatable by 'lest' when 
followed by a clause which expresses an unreal or not yet 
realized state of affairs. The verb in the clause is in 
the subjunctive form. 

idris laRsan tis?at fi 'Study lest you should fail the 
limtiRaan. test.' 

matza??aluul la 'Do not offend him lest he should 

yistaqiil. resign.' 

Rawarriihum iImustana- 'I will show them the documents 
daat afisan yiftikiru lest they should think that I 
nni bakdib ?aleehum. am lying to them.' 

(b) 'because' : The conjunction is translatable by 'because' 
when it is followed by a clause which expresses a real 
state of affairs. If the clause contains a verb, it is 
in the indicative form. 

matgill fi yulyu laRsan 'Do not come in July because 
iddunya bitkuun Rarr (dvuring that month) the weather 

?awi. is very hot.' 




EGVVTIAN ARABIC 


65 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


10 . 


11 . 


ifitaris fi kalaamak 
maTaah aftsan da 
fiassaas xaalis. 
yal[a biina ba?a lafisan 
it?axxarna. 


'Mind what you say to him 
because he is very sensitive.' 


'Let's go because we're 
(already) late.' 

i 11 i 'for ( indicating cause )' : This conjunction is usually 
( though not necessarily ) followed by a verb. 

ana yabi I I i sadda?tak. 'I am stupid for having believed 

you.' 


ana mabsuut ilIi 'I am glad I will be able to 

(Ta?dar azurhum ?abl visit them before they leave.' 
ma ysafru. 

iyyaak : This conjunction expresses hope. It is preceded 
by a verb and followed by a verb or a verbal clause : the 
first verb is usually imperative or futvire; the second is a 


subjtmctive form. 

usbur iyyaak tityayyar 
i l?afiwaal . 

Fiasbur iyyaak il?afiwaal 
t ityayyar. 

istanna iyyaak yiigi. 


'Be patient; hopefully the 
circumstances will change.' 

'I will be patient in the hope 
that circumstances will change.' 
'Wait, maybe he'll come.' 


B. Conjunctions of Type 2 

As has already been stated, a sentence with a Type 2 conjunction 
has two structures : one in which the conjunction precedes the 
joined entities, and another in which the conjunction occurs between 
the joined entities. Although it occurs less commonly than the 
other, the second structure will be considered the source string; 
setting up the first structure as the source string would result 
in a relatively complicated transformation. The "first" of the 
joined entities is the one which occurs before the conjunction in 
the source string; similarly, the "second" of the joined entities 
is the one which occurs after the conjunction in the source string. 
1. lamma ~ amma 'when' ; each of the joined entities usually 


contains a verb. The verb of the second entity is usually 




EGVniM ARABIC 


66 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


without an aspect prefix. 
RaruuR amma ddunya 
tbattal matar. 
atwna ddunya tbattal 
matar Fiaruufi. 


' I will go when the rain stops.' 

"When the rain stops, I will 
go.' 


baydab Iamma yiigi 
iIfasI min yeer 
ma yi?miI wagbu. 

Iamma yiigi iIfasl 
min yeer ma yi9mi1 
wagbu baydab. 


'I get angry when he comes to 
class without having done his 
homework.' 

'When he comes to class without 
having done his homework, 1 
get angry.' 


itYarraft ?aleeh Iamma 
kunt taal ib fi gamfit 
iIqaahira. 

Iamma kunt taalib fi 
gamTit i Iqaahira 
tTarraft Taleeh. 


'I got to know him when I was a 
student at the University of 
Cairo.' 

'When I was a student at the 
University of Cairo, I got to 
know him.' 


2. iza , in , law 'if 

3. Talaan ~ Talalaan 


See "Conditional Sentences". 


(a) 


'in order to ( purpose ) ' ; The conjunction is translat¬ 
able by 'in order to' when followed by the subjunctive verb 
form. 

'He went to the embassy in order 
to see the cultural attache.' 


raali issifaara Talaan 
yi?aabil ilmulhaq 
issaqaafi. 

TaSaan yi?aabil 
ilmulRaq issaqaaf! 
raafi issifaara. 


(b) 


'In order to see the cultural 
attache, he went to the 
embassy.' 

'because' : The conjunction is translatable by 'because' 
when not followed by a subjunctive verb form. 

bitfiibbu TalaSan 'She loves him because he 

biyitmallaqha. 


flatters her.' 




EGYPUM ARABIC 


67 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


falaSaan biyitma1laqha 
bitfSibbu. 

ana mrawwafi ?a5aan 
raasi wagfaani. 

Casaan raasi wagTaani 
ana mrawwafi. 

4. tnadaain ' since ( cause ) ' : 

rawwaFi madaam il^uyi 
xl I is. 

madaam i^luyl x i I is 
rawwaFi. 

yiluflu luyla tanya 
madaam biyikrah 
ii§uyia d i. 

madaam biyikrah iSiuyla 
di, yiiuflu luyla 
tanya. 

yaguuz astiri Tarabiyya 
madaam asTaar iibanziin 
Fiat inxif id. 

madaam as?aar iibanziin 
fiatinxif id, yaguuz 
altiri Tarabiyya. 


'Because he flatters her she 
loves him.' 

'I am going home because I 
have a headache.' 

'Because I have a headache, I 
am going home.' 

'Go home since the work is 
done.' 

'Since the work is done, go 
home.' 

'Let him find himself another 
job since he hates this one.' 

'Since he hates this job, let 
him find himself another job.' 

'I may buy a car since the price 
of gas is going to go down.' 

'Since the price of gas is 
going to go down, I may buy 
a car.' 


This conjunction agrees in number, gender, and person with a 
preceding ( but not a following ) noun subject; it also agrees 
in number, gender, and person with a pronoun subject. The 
pronoun subject, when expressed, indicates emphasis and follows 
madaam , which agrees with the pronotm { unlike madaam + following 
noun subject ). The forms of the conjunction are listed below, 
followed by a few illustrative contexts ; 




EGYPUAM ARABIC 


68 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


(huwwa) 

(hiyya) 

(humma) 

(inta) 

(inti) 

(intu) 

(ana) 

(ifina) 

madaam taiamziti 
mabsutiin ana 
mabsuut. 

madaam fariida mabsuuta 
ana mabsuut. 

taiamziti madaamu 
mabsut i in ana 
mabsuut. 

fariida madaamit mabsuuta 
ana mabsuut. 

?aii mabsuut madumti 
inti mabsuuta. 

madumt i inti mabsuuta 
Tali mabsuut. 

Taii mabsuut madumna 
fina mabsut i in. 

madumna fina mabsut i i n 
Tal i mabsuut. 

Notice that before a noun subject 
conjunction occurs. 


madaam 

madaamit 

madaamu 

madumt 
madumti 
madumtu 

madumt 

madumna 

'As long as my students are 
happy, I am happy.' 

'As long as Farida is happy, 

I am happy.' 

'As long as my students are 
happy, I am happy.' 

'As long as Farida is happy, 

I am happy.' 

'Ali is happy as long as you 
(fs) are happy.' 

'As long as you (fs) are happy, 
Ali is happy.' 

'Ali is happy as long as w 
are happy.' 

'As long as we are happy, Ali 
is happy.' 

only the huwwa form of the 




EGYPTIM ARABIC 


69 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


5. mahma 'no matter what, regardless of what' ; with mahma , 
an imperfect verb is subjunctive if it occurs in the second 
of the joined entities. Note that the verb in the clause 
following mahma ccm be imperfect or perfect with no change 
in time meaning. 

matsadda?uul mahma 'Do not believe him no matter 

y?ullak. what he tells you.' 

mahma y?ullak 'No matter what he tells you, 

matsadda?uul. do not believe him.' 


fiaxa[[as ilmaSruu? da 
mahma kali Ifni l?amr. 
mahma kalIifni l?amr 
FiaxaNas ilmaSruuT da. 


'I will complete this project no 
matter what it costs me to do so. 
'No matter what it costs me to do 
so, I will ccanplete this project. 


C. Conjunctions of Type 3 


1. imma...(wi) imma ~ ya (imma) — ya (imma) 'either...or' : Each 
of the joined entities usually contains a verb; neither the 
verb of the first entity nor that of the second can be an 


imperative form. 

ilkitaab imma fmaktabi 
wi imma fmaktabak. 
?al i imma byidris 
filmaktaba, wa imma 
biyTuum finnaadi. 
ya imma maat ya imma 
mii 9aawIz yiktib 
gawabaat. 

ya tiigi maktabi ya 
aruufi maktabak. 
ya taakul ya t?uum. 


'The book is either in my office 
or in yours.' 

'Ali is either studying in the 
library or swimming at the 
club.' 

'He is either dead or unwilling 
to write letters.' 

'Either you come to my office 
or I go to yours.' 

'Either eat or leave.' 


I a...waI a 'neither...nor' : This conjunction occurs in a 
sentence whose source strings are negated and joined by vn 


2. 




EG/FTIAW ARABIC 


70 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


'and'. The form is added to the first sovirce string ; it 
either (a) replaces the negative particle or (b) cor-occurs 
with the negative particle and precedes an element to be 
contrasted. The form wala is added to the second source 
string ; it replaces both and the negative particle. In 
each of the following examples, (b) and (c) are derived from 

(a); notice that, in each case, the derivation involves the 
deletion of a redundant verb form : 

(a) miS biyidris filbeet 'He does not study at home, and 

wi mil biyidris he does not study in the 

fiimaktaba. library.' 


(b) la bvidris filbeet 'Neither does he study at home 

waia fiimaktaba. nor (does he study) at the library.' 

(c) mil biyidris la filbeet 'He does not study either at home 

wala fiimaktaba. or in the library.' 


(a) maluftuul hina 'I did not see him here and I 

wmaluftuul hinaak. did not see him there.' 

(b) la luftu hina wala 'Neither did I see him here nor 

hnaak. (did I see him) there.' 

(c) maluftuul la hina 'I did not see him either here 

wala hnaak. or there.' 


(a) matruFil i I beet wi 

matruFil ilmadrasa. 

(b) la truufi iI beet wala 

Imadrasa. 

(c) matrufil la Ibeet wala 

I madrasa. 


'Do not go home, and do not 
go to school.' 

'Neither go home nor to school.' 

'Do not go either home or to 
school.' 


Following is a list of the most common conjunctions in Egyptian Arabic 
with sentences illustrating only a certain number of them. 




EGWriAN ARABIC 


71 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


1 . i n if ( possible ) 

in gat badri fiaruuFi ma?aaha. 

'If she comes early, I'll go with her.' 

2. iza if t possible ) 

iza gat badri fiaruuft ma?aaha. 

'If she comes early. I'll go with her.' 

3 . law kaan if ( contrary to fact ) 

law kaanit gat badri kunt rufit mafaaha. 

'If she had come early, I would have gone with her.' 

4. iila in except if; unless 

5. ilia iza except if; unless 

mil ISaruuh ilia iza gat badri. 

'I will not go unless she comes early,' 

6. ilia law except if; unless 

7. fiatta in even if 

8. fiatta iza even if 

9. fiatta law even if 

mil fiaruufi fiatta law gat badri, 

'I would not go even if she came early.' 

10 . lamma when, until 

fiaruufi lamma tiig i, 

'I'll go when she comes.' 
fia?Tud hina lamma tirga?. 

'I'll stay here until you come back..' 

11 . amma when 

12. mahma no matter what; regardless of what 

mahma ?aalit mil fiasma? kalamha, 

•No matter what she says, I won't listen to her.' 

13. ?abl ma before 

iysil Ideek ?abl ma taakul, 

'Wash your hands before you eat.' 

14. ba?d ma after 

15. Iiyaayit ma until 

u?Tud hina liyaavit ma tiigi. 

'stay here until she comes.' 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


72 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


16. 

17. 

18. 


19. 


20 . 


21 . 


22 . 

23. 

24. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28 


I i Fiadd tna 
wa?t ma 
saa?it ma 


awwiI ma 


yadoGb...wi... 


min year ma 


biduun ma 

afSsan 

laRsan 


iili 


i1?ann 


min year 


biduun 


until 
when 
just as 

luftu saa?it ma daxai. 

*I saw him when he entered,' 
as soon as 

awwii ma daxai miliit ana. 

'As soon as he entered, I left.' 
no sooner...than; as soon as 
yadoob daxai wana mSiit. 

'No sooner had he entered, than I left.' 
without 

kaltaha min year ma aTraf eeh hiyya. 

'I ate it (f) without knowing what it was. ' 
without 

lest, for fear that 
lest, for fear that 

?aawiz aruuR akaliimu diiwa?t lahsan yimSi. 

'I want to go talk to him now, lest he should leave.' 

because; that 

ana farhaan ilii §uftak. 

'I am happy because (that) I saw you (ms).' 
because; for 

magaal innaharda li?annu tafbaan. 

'He did not come today because he is tired.' 
magatS li?annaha nisyit. 

'She did not come because she forgot,' 
magatl Ii?ann axuuha nisi yi?ullaha. 

'She did not come because her brother forgot to tell her. 
without 

nagaht min yeer musa?ditu. 

'I succeeded without his help.' 
without 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


73 


REFERENCE GRAUm. 


29. birrayni min 


30. lawla 


31. lawla in 


32. In 


33. amma 


34. wl “ w 


in spite of 

birraym min musa?ditu managafiS. 

'In spite of his help he did not succeed.' 
but for 

lawla musa?ditu roakuntiB nagafit. 

'But for his help I would not have succeeded.’ 
but for 

lawla innu satidni makuntlS nagaBt. 

'If it were not (but) for his help. I would not have 
succeeded.' 
that; because 
huwwa farBaan innu Saafak. 

'He is hc^py because (that) he saw you.' 
as for; but 

ana niBt, anma buwwa ?a?ad hina. 

'I went, but he stayed here.' 
and 


ana darast whuwwa naam. 

'I studied and he slept ( =* and => while ) 

ana darast wnimt. 

'I studied and slept.' 

35. aw or 

36. walla or 

inta masri walla suuri ? 

'Are you Egyptian or Syrian? 

Inta Batiktib walla Batnaam ? 

'Are you going to write or sleep? 

37. ya...ya... either...or 

38. imtna wl imma either...or 

39 . imma aw either...or 

40 . ya imma ya imma either. ..or 

ya imma huwwa ya Imma hlyya BayruuBu masr fisseef . 

'Either he or she will go to Egypt in the stanner.' 

ya imma truuB masr ya imma truuB iubnaan fisseef. 

' S h e will either go to Egypt or Lebanon in the sunnier.' 



EGYTUAN ARABIC 


74 


REFERENCE GRAimR 


41. ya fmma...aw 

42. Ia...wala 


43. i nnania 


44= ?a§aar! 


45 . ?alaSaan 


either...or 
neither...nor 

la Iwalad wala Ibint kaanu hina. 

'Neither the boy nor the girl was here.' 

la kal wala Slrlb Baaga mbaarlB. 

'He neither ate nor drank anything yesterday.' 
bat as for; whereas 
iIbint gat innama Iwalad magaa§. 

"The girl came but the boy didn't.' 
kaitu innama ma?agabniiS. 

'I ate it (ms) but X didn't like it.' 
because; in order co; for 
magaaS ?alaan misaafir. 

'He did not come becatise he is away (traveling).' 
'because; in order to; for 
gat ?aiaSaan t Idris mafaaya.. 

'She came in order to stoidy with me.' 


46. laakin 

47. bass 


48. madaam 

49. %aa\ama 


but 

but; only 

huwwa kuwayyis bass taTbaan ^uwayya. 

'He is all right but he is a little bit (somewhat) tired.' 

gat bass madarasitS Baaga. 

'She came but she didn't study anything.' 
since ( « because ) 
as long as 


*** *** *** 


CONSONm 

A class of speech sounds characteurized by constriction or closure 
of the air stream or friction at one or more point (s) in the breath 
channel; e.g., EA / b d t g /. 


*** 


*** 


*** 



EGVrrJAN ARABIC 


75 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


CONSONANT : CLEAR/1/ VERSUS VARK/I/ 

The Egyptian Arabic/!/ is like the "1" in English 'leave' and is 
called a clear "1". In some cases the dark /!/ is used and it is the 
same as the "I" in the English word 'puli'. In EA the contrast 
between clear / !/ and dark or emphatic (q.v.) /[/ is phonemic whereas 
in English they are allophonic variants of the phoneme /1 / . The 
following minimal pair illustrates the phonemic nattjre of the 
distinction in EA : 

walla 'or' : wal|a 'by God' 


*** *** *** 


CONSONANT : VISTRIBUTION 

(a) In Egyptian Arabic (EA) any single consonant may occur at the 
beginning of a word, in the middle, or at the end; e.g., ti in 
'figs', katab 'he wrote', faat 'he passed'. 

(b) Doubled consonants may occur medially or finally; e.g., 11ssa 

'not yet', bass 'enough'. 

(c) A sequence of two different consonants may occur medially or 
finally; e.g., tiktib 'you (ms) write', malakt 'you (ms) 
owned'. 

(d) A sequence of three or more consonants never occurs, either 
within a word or passing from the end of one word to the begin¬ 
ning of the next. This inadmissable sequence is avoided by the 
helping vowel /i/ ( see Phonology 9 ). /i/ is the vowel of 
English bit . The helping vowel /!/ is always added between the 

second and third consonauits; e.g. /iddars + sahl/- ^ 

/iddars i sahl/ 'the lesson is easy'. 


*** 


*** 


*** 





EGyPTlM ARABIC 


76 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


CONSONANT : VOUBLEV 

A doubled consonant has precisely twice the duration of a single 
consonant in any given utterance. All consonants may occur doiibled 
in Egyptian Arabic. 


*** *** *** 

CONSONANT : EMPHATIC = VELARIIEV * PHARYNGEALIZEV = FLAT 

Egyptian Arabic is characterized by having a set of emphatic 
consonants, wiiich are sometimes referred to also as either "velar- 
ized", "pharyngealized", or "flat". An emphatic consonant is one 
which is produced by raising and backing the dorsum of the tongue 
concurrently with the primary dental or alveolax articulation so 
that the articulation is velarized and pharyngealized. The consonants 
/ t d s z I r / are the emphatic counterparts of the PLAIN / t d 
s z 1 r /. The occurence of an onphatic consonant will cause a 
plain consonant in the same syllable ( sometimes in the preceding 
and/or the following syllable ) to become emphatic. The domain of 
the spread of emphasis is the syllable, which means that a syllable 
has all or none of its sounds emphatic. This also means that in 
Egyptian Arabic all of the consonants occur as both emphatic and 
plain consonants as explained above. Thus in 

/taab/ = [ taab ] 'to ripen' 

the emphatic /\/ caused plain /b/ to become emphatic [ b ] and the 
vowel /a/ is colored with emphasis which means you'll hear an [ a ] 
similar to that of English father . As examples of the spread of 
the domain of emphasis to more than one syllable, we cite the 
following / - / denotes syllable boundary ; 

/rabatu/ = [ ra-ba-tu ] 'he tied him' 

/muFiadraat/ = [ mu-flad-raat ] 'lectures' 

The influence of emphatic consonants on vowels is very noticeable 
to a non-native speaker. This is particularly clear with the back 






EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


77 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


vowel /a/ which, when in the environment of an emphatic consonant 
is pronounced further back. In the environment of an emphatic 
consonant, /]/ is centralized and /u/ is lowered. 

ititit ititit 


CONSONANT : PLAIN 

A non-velarized or non-pharyngealized consonant that is the counter¬ 
part of an emphatic consonant; / t d s z 1 r / 

*** *** *** 


CONSONANT : PRONUNCIATION 


Egyptian Arabic has more consonants than does English. Most of the 
soxinds are pronounced like their English counterparts, while a few 
are quite unlike anything in English and, therefore, require a great 
deal of practice on the part of the student. 

Egyptian Arabic consonants pronounced almost like their English 
counterparts : 

Egyptian Arabic 


p (occurs in borrowings) 
t 
d 
k 

g 

f 

V (occurs in borrowings) 
s 
z 
I 

1 (occurs in borrowings) 
m 


As in English 
boy 
pin 
tea 
dish 

cat, king 
go 
fine 
vine 
see 
zeal 
she 

pleasure, measure 
me 



EGmiAN ARABIC 


78 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Egyptian Arabic As in English 

n no 

w well 

y yet 

The following sounds also exist in English, but please note; 

/!/ : Egyptian /!/ is like the "I" in English 'leave' rather than the 
”1" of English 'feel'. Egyptian Arabic /!/ then is like the first "1" 
in the English word 'level' but never like the second unless velarized 
C i.e., /!/ ). 

To realize what this means, you might like to try to say 'puli', then 
start the word 'leave' where you finished 'puli'. Now you may realize 
that initial "1" in English is different from medial and final "I", 

Thus Egyptian Arabic walla 'or' has an " " like that of English 
'leave'; Egyptian Arabic waI !a 'by God' has an "1" like that of English 
'puli'. The first "I" in 'level' is referred to as clear "I" and the 
last "I" is termed dark "I". Egyptian Arabic /!/ is clear and the em¬ 
phatic /}/ is dark . The distinction between EA plain /!/ and en®)hatic 
/}/ is phonemic, whereas the distinction between clear "I" and dark "I" 
in English is allophonic ( see : Consonant ; Clear /!/ Versus Dark /[/ ). 

/h/ as in English 'he' : /h/ is not difficult when it begins a syllable 
or a word, e.g., Egyptian Arabic haat 'give me' or mafhuum 'it is under¬ 
stood' . But the student may have difficulty pronouncing /h/ when it is 
at the end of a syllable or a word, e.g., ?ahwa 'coffee', ?eeh 'what?', 
or ?abuuh 'his father'. 

/?/, the glottal stop, is a sound that should not give the English 
speaker any trouble. It is produced by complete closure and release 
of the vocal cords; it is sometimes found in English as in New York 
dialect pronounciation /bo?l/ 'bottle' or as the initial sound of Eng¬ 
lish 'ouch', or between the two vowels of 'uh-oh'. 

In Egyptian Arabic, words or utterances never begin with a vowel, 
whether short or long. In all cases where a non-native speaker 



EGWriM ARABIC 


79 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


hears what he thinks is an initial vowel, it is always /?/ + vowel ; 
thus : 

/ana/ = /?ana/ 'I' 

/eeh/ = /?eeh/ 'what ?' 

*** **» *** 

CONSONANT : VOICEV / VOICELESS 

Refers to whether or not the vocal cords vibrate diuring the pro¬ 
duction of a sound. A voiced consonant is one which is accompanied 
by vibration of the vocal cords, for example, /v/ in the English 
word 'vine* . A voiceless consonant is one which is produced without 
any accompanying vibration of the vocal cords, for example, /f/ in 
the English word * fine' . 

The difference between voicing and voicelessness can be felt 
strongly if one covers one's ears with one's hands, then pronounces 
English 'fine' and 'vine* , paying attention to the /f/ and /v/. 

*** *** *** 

CONSTRUCT PHRASE 

1. Construct Phrases + N 2 = the Nj_ of N 2 
A construct phrase is either 
(a) definite , if N 2 is definite 

/kitaab ilwalad/ 'the boy's book' 

/kitaab ilwalad ilkibiir/ 'the book of the big boy' 
/kitaab haani/ 'Hani's book' 

/kitaab uxti/ 'my sister's book' 

or tb) indefinite , if N 2 is indefinite 

/kitaab walad/ 'a boy's book.' 

In either case the construct phrase consists of two nouns 
Ni + N 2 in a sequence meaning of N 2 . Note that Nj^ is 






EGyPTJM ARABIC 


80 


REFBREWCE GRAMMAR 


definite in meaning , but caiuiot be definite in form ; N 2 may be 
definite or indefinite in meaning and form. 

Either or N 2 of a construct phrase can be modified by an 
adjective which is always placed after N 2 and agrees in gender, 
niunber and definiteness with the noun modified. Examples : 

/kitaab i I bint ilkibiir/ 'the girl's big book' 

/kitaab i I bint ilkibiira/ 'the big girl's book' 

/kitaab bint kibiir/ 'a girl's big book' 

If both terms of a construct phrase are to be modified, a 
bitaa? construction is used, e.g., 

ilkitaab ilkibiir bitaaT ilbint ilFiilwa 
'the pretty girl's big book' 

2. Construct phrases where is a feminine noun ending in /-a/. 

In this case, has a special form for the construct state (CS) , 
e.g., 

/Tarabiyya/ 'car' gives : Aarabiyyit nagwa/ 'Nagwa's car' 

3.ncL 

/suura/ 'picture' gives : /suurit safibi/ 'my friend's picture' 

( Notice /safibi/ 'my friend' is made definite by possession. ) 

Compare the forms of /suura/ in the following ; 

/suura kbiira/ 'a big picture' 

/suurit safibi/ 'my friend's picture' 

where the first example is a noun-adjective phrase and the second 
is a construct phrase . ( Note : /-a/ —/-it/ in a construct 
phrase. ) 

*** *** *** 

CONSTRUCT STATE OF NOUNS 


Note : for /ayyaam/ and /ushur/ the construct state after numerals 
3 - 10 is /tiyyaam/ and /tuShur/ : 



EGyPHAN ARABIC 


81 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


/talat tlyyaam/ 'three days' 

/xamas tu2hur/ 'five months' 

A few other words that belong to tdiis limited class of nouns are : 
alf - alaaf thousamd 

saba? talaaf 7,000 

satr “ sutuur line ( in writing ) 

t Isa? tustur nine lines 

xums - axmaas fifth < fraction ) 

talat tlxmaas 3/5 

and other fractions, and optionally : 

?a I am - ? 11 aam pencil, pen 

talat tf?laam ~ three pencils 

talat ?fIaam 

( See also : Construct Phrase ) 

*** *** *** 

COUNT PLURAL NOUNS 

( See : Collective Nouns } 


*** 









EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


83 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


V 


DEFINITE ARTICLE : FORM 

In EA, the definite article is /H-/. The /!/ of the article is 
obligatorily assimilated to certain consonants, and optionally assimi¬ 
lated to certain other consonants : 

1. The /!/ is obligatorily assimilated to a following dental con- 


sonant or 

a following /S/. The dental consonants 

are /t/, /t/. 

/d/, /d/. 

/s/, /s/, /z/, /?/, /r/. 

/r/, and /n/. 

Examples, 

ittaman 

'the price' 

izzibiib 

'the raisins' 

ittaalib 

'the student' 

izzaabit 

'the officer' 

iddamm 

'the blood' 

irrifila 

'the trip' 

iddudaTa 

'the frog' 

irraagi1 

'the man* 

issamaka 

'the fish 

i nnaas 

'the people* 

Issabuuna 

'the soap' 

i §Sams 

'the sun' 


2. The /I/ is optionally assimilated to a following /k/ or /g/, e.g.: 

ilka lb or ikkalb 'the dog' 

i I gama1 or iggama1 'the camel' 

3. The form of the definite eirticle is /!-/ when it follows a word 
ending in a vowel : 

ittaaliba Igidiida 'the new student Cf)' 

4. usually the form of the definite article is /iI-/ when it is pre¬ 
fixed to a word beginning with a vowel, e.g. : 

(?)arnab 'rabbit' il?arnab 'the rabbit' 

(?)adab 'literature' il?adab 'the literature' 



ESV7TIM ARABIC 


34 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


However, with verbal nouns of Form VXII (. see i Verbal Nouns ) and 
colors of the form aF^ai and such words as itneen 'two' the form of the 
definite article is /I-/ "■ /li I-/, Note the dropping of the /?/ in 
these exao^les : 

t?)ifirtlfiaan 'exam' limtlfiaan - illirotifiaan 'the exam' 

C?)afvtar 'red' lafimar ~ illafimar 'the red' 

(?)itneen 'two' 1itneen " illitneen 'the two' 

*** **« *•* 

DEFINITE ARTICLE : MEANING 

When it is prefixed to a given noun, the definite article iiuiicates 
that the noun has an unambiguous referent. In regard to its referent, 
a noun is ambiguous if it is likely to elicit the question "Which 
one and unambiguous if it would not normally elicit such a question. 
Compaire, for example, the underlined nouns in the following sentences : 

1. iStareet kitaab . 'I bought a book.' 

2. iltareet iIkitaab . 'I bought the book.’ 

While kitaab in the first sentence is likely to elicit the question 
"Which book ?" or the question "What book ?", iIkitaab in the second 
sentence is not likely to do so; thus kitaab is ambiguous while 
iikitaab is unambiguous. 

In general, a noun is unambiguous if it has a specific referent 
( i.e., a particiilar referent set off in some way from similar 
referents ) , or a generic referent. The underlined nouns in the 
following sentences have generic referents : 

1. i I ?aanii I yistafii?? ugritu. 'A workman is worthy of his 

compensation.' 

ittayyaara asra? min 'A plane is faster tham a train.' 

il?atr . 

iIkutub ahamm min 'Books are more important than 

iqgaraayid . newspapers.' 

il?atibbaa? mil ahamm 'Doctors are not more important 

min iImudarrisiin. than teachers.’ 




EGWHAN ARABIC 


85 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


2- I Imayya muhlmma lilFiayaat 
Izzeet yaaIi fmasr. 
irrami anwaa?. 

3. 11 fiubb lar'J asaasi 

IIggawaaz. 

?Ifa?r miS ?eeb. 
n?amal afisan min 
iIbitaala. 


'Water is essential for life^*_ 

'Oil is e:q)ensive in Egypt.! 

"There are different types of sand.' 

'Love is a beisic pre-requisite_ 

for marriage.' 

'Poverty is not shameful.' 
'Employment is better than _ 
unemployment. * __ „ 


Some of the underlined nouns in group 1 imply a class vdiile others 
denote a class ; for example, i I Taami I in the first sentence refers to 
any member of the class of people identified as workers, tdiile 
i l?atIbbaa? in the fourth sentence denotes a class of people identi¬ 
fied as doctors. 

The underlined muns of group 2, in contrast with those of group 1, 
denote mass ( rather than countable ) referents. 

The underlined nouns of group 3, in contrast with those o£ the other 
two groups, denote abstract ( rather than concrete ) referents. 

Since they are generic, the underlined nouns of all three groups 
occur with the definite article. Notice that the occurrence of the 
with English generic notins is more restricted than the occurrence of 
i I - with Arabic generic nouns : to be preceded by the , an English 
generic noun must be singular and countable ( compare " Doctors aure 
rich", " work is a privilege", and " The car is a recent invention" ) . 
Notice too that, in English, singular generic nouns may be preceded 
by the indefinite article ( e.g., " A plame travels faster than a car" ) 
vdiile plural generic nouns are preceded by no article at all { e.g., 
" Books are important" ); in Arabic, however, all generic nouns 
usually occur with the definite article. 


*** 


ititit 


*** 




EGYPTIM ARABIC 


.86 


^REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


DEFINITE PHRASE 

C See ; Phrase Versus Sentence ) 


*** . *** *** 


PEFIWITENESS 


t See : Agreement in Construct Phrases; Definite Article ; Form; 
Definite Article ; Meaning ) 

itit* *iiii 


VEMONSTHATJVES 

The demonstratives ^ (ms) ‘this,:that'; ^ (fs) 'this, that'; and 
dool (p) 'these, those' may preceed or follow a noun or adjective 
with consequent significant differences in dlausal structure : 

They may stand alone as the subject of a sentence ; 

(a) da walad kibiir. 'This is a big boy.' 

Cb) da kbiir. 'This is big,' 

Or they may follow a definite noun to form a phrase meaning 
‘this ...' ; 

iIwalad da kbiir. 'Biis boy is big.' 
da (m), ^ (f), dool (p) are for proximity , 'this, these'; dukha (m), 
dikha (f) and dukhum (p) are for remoteness , 'that, those'. 

Iticit ititit itirit 


VBfTAL 


A place of articulation at the upper teeth /t d s z n I /. 






* itit 


EGVmAN ARABIC 


n. 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


mscommous morpheme 

A broken sequence which tagether forms a morpheme of a cerhain 
functionr e.g., /ma....S/ is the morpheme of negation in EA. 


Example : 


katab 

makatabS 


•he wrote' 

•he did not write* 


*** *** *** 


PROPPING OF VOUELS 


( See : Vowels : Contraction } 


*** *** *•* 


VUAL NOUNS 


The numeral "two" /Itneen/ may be used before plural nouns, e.g., 
itneen wllaad 'two boys' 

Itneen banaat 'two girls* 

cuid is used before plural adjectives : 

Itneen kubaair 'two big ( ones }'. 

However, the use of the Dual Form of the noun is preferable for most 
nouns. This is achieved by the suffixation of /-een/, the dual ending, 
to a ms noun or to the CS ( Construct State ) of fs nouns eruiing in 
"3 iff e.g., 

waladeen (<walad) 
safibiteen (< saFba) 
fallafiteen (<fallaaf)a) 
kitabeen (< kitaab) 
b Inteen (<blnt) 


'two boys' 

•two friends (f)' 
'two farmers (f)' 
•two books' 

•two girls' 


The phrase N (dual) Itneen is a possible occurence, which has the 

effect of emphasizing the idea of duality . _ 

'two boys (emphasizing duality)' 


waladeen Itneen 




BSVmAN ARABIC 


88 


REFEREf/CE GRAMMAR 


This is often accoo^lisbed in English by pronouncing 'two' with heavier- 
than-ttsual stress. With certain nouns it is preferable to have the 
word order itneen + N (p) for the dual es^ression. Examples : 

itneen sawwa?iin 'two drivers' 

itneen rassamiln 'two painters (artists)' 

itneen failafiiin 'two farmers' 

itneen xaddatniin 'two servants' 

itneen fialia?i!n 'two hairdressers' 

( See also : Collective Nouns ) 

mar *** 

VURATJVE FORM 

( See : Frequentative Form ) 




*** 






EGymAN ARABIC 


89 


REFERENCE GRAimH 


ELISION 

C See : Vowels : Cont:raction ) 

*«* *** *** 

ELLIPSIS 

An elliptic sentence or clause is one «diich is derived by deleting 
at least one reduncUmt constituent from the source string. In each 
of the following examples, the source string contains a redundant 
expression ( identified by underscore ) >diich is dropped by a 
deletion transformation : 

ya sa11 w f §§i w yasalt r igIayya 'X washed by face and I washed 

my feet' 

—•>Yasalt wiSSi wrlglayya 'I washed my face and my feet' 

mustafa aka I wl ba?deen mustafa 'ttustapha ate and then Mustapha 
naam slept* 

**—>mustafa akai w! baldeen naam 'Mustapha ate and then slept' 

Elliptic sentences occur very commonly as short responses : 

fall : darasti eah bald Jdduhr ? 'Ali : What did you (fs) study 

in the adftemoon ?' 

suzaan : iddars flxaarais. 'Susan : Lesson S' 



EGVmAH ARABIC _90_ REFERENCE GRAmAR 

notice that Suatan* s response is derived frco J-Sli^SES—iiiSSSSLi^ 

'r studied Lesson 5’ by deleting the contextuad-ly redundant expressions. 

Although ellipsis is coomon in both English euad EA, the deleted 
cozistituents are not always the same in the two languages. ^ In the 
exaa^les below, certain constituents are deleted from the English 
sentence (a) to produce the sentence (b); if the same constituents 
were deleted frcn the BA sentence (c), the result would be the 
ungrammatical sentence <d) : 

(a) Sami read a book and Susjui read an article. 

(b) Sami read a book and Susan an article. 

(c) saami Tan Ktaab wl suzaan ?arit maqaala. 

'Sami read a book and Susan read an article.' 

(d) *saami ?ara ktaab wt suzaan naqaala. 

In EA, the major rules governing ellipsis are the following : 

1. An upression cannot be deleted unless it is redundant. There 
are two t 3 fpes of redundancy : 

(a) Type 1 redundancy is defined as the occurrence in the 
answer of expressions vdtich are totaU.ly predictable from 
the expressions in the question. 

(b) Type 2 redundancy is defined as repetition of expressions_ 

in the same sentence or across sentence boundaries which 
does not constitute Type 1 redundancy. 

2. The constituents deleted on account of Type 1 red^lni^mcy are 
usueLlly the same in English emd EA. 

When an. expression is repeated, it is usually the second 
occurrence which is considered redundant and which is therefore 
deleted. 

3. An expression is usually not deleted on account of Type 2 
redundancy if such deletion would produce a structuraLL gap in 
the resultant sentence, ( i.e., if a given slot in a clause were- 
to be deleted ). 

As a result of Rule 3, deletion in set (a) below produces grammatical 
sentences \diile in set (b) it produces ungrammatical sentences : 




EGWTJAN ARABIC 


91 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


a. (1) fiasan aka I wf ftasan naan) 
fiasan atePwl naam 

(2) kaan ?aawiz yibil? 

Mtarablyya Mkaan ?aawiz 
yI Than 11 beet 
—> kaan ?aawlz ylbii? 

Iltarabiyya wylrhan 
11 beet 

(3) farlld rigi? wi saatni 

rlgl? 

—> farlld wi saami rig?u 


'Hasan ate and Hasan slept' 
'Hasan ate and slept' 

'He wanted to sell the car 
£U)d he wanted to mortgage 
tile house* 

'He wanted to sell the car 
and mortgage the house' 

'Farid returned and Sami 
returned' 

'Farid and Sami returned' 


b. 


(1) 7a11 Stara ktaab wi 

lutfi Stai^ ?alam 
---^*7all §tara ktaab wi 
lutfi ?alam 

(2) ana SaggaTt ittilmiiz 

wi lutfi daayi? ittilmiiz 
—> *ana Sagga7t ittilmiiz 
wi lutfi daayi? 

(3) huda bitfiibb il?adab 

il?arabi wi suheer bitfiibb 

il?adab ii7arabi 

• 

—*huda bitfiibb il?adab 


'All bought a book and Lutfi 
botight a pen' 


'I encouraged the student and 
Lutfi bothered the student' 

'Huda likes Arabic literature 
and Soheir likes Arabic 
literature' 


il7arabi wsuheer 


The output in b(l) is ungrammatical because it contains a sturctural 
gap : the output clearly consists of two clauses; to be a direct 
object, ?alam 'pen' must co-occur in the same clause with a verb. In 
contrast, consider the output of the following tr 2 uisfozmation : 

7a I i Stara ktaab wi 7a Ii 'Ali bought a book and Ali 

Stai^ ?alam bought a pen' 

—>7al i Stara ktaab wi ?alam 'Ali bought a book and a pen' 

The ou^nit here is a single clause consisting of three slots : a subject 
slot filled by ^11, a verbal slot filled by iStara , and a direct 


object slot filled by the compound phrase kitaab wi ?alam . This out- 



EGyPHAW ARABIC 


92 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


put therefore is grannatical : uxilike the output of b(l ), it does not 
contain a structural gap. 

The output of b(2) cognises two clauses the second of vrtiich contains 
a trauisitive verb but no object; the lack of an object constitutes 
a structured, gap. 

m the ottl^t of b(3), suheer must function as subject if the 
desired meaning is to be denoted. The lack of a predicate after suheer 
not only constitutes a gap but also makes suheer the second term of 
a compound object : 

huda bttfiibb ll?adab fl?arabi wsuheer means 'Huda likes ( both ) 
Arabic Mterature and Soheir'. 

Here are two more exanples «diere the output is ungrammatical on 
account of gape i . 

katabt llkitaab Issana IIi faat it wl katabt iimaqaala ssanaadi 

'I wrote the book last year, and I wrote the article this year* 
>~^*katabt llkitaab issana Mi faat it wilmaqaala ssanaadi 

samilr biyidris fllbeet wi fariid biyidris filmaktaba 

'Samir studies at heme, and Farid studies in the library* 

—->*samllr biyidris filbeet wi fariid filmaktaba 

( The output here would be grammatical if the meaning intended 
were ’Samir studies at home while Farid is in the library* ) 

To avoid redundguicy and structural gaps, EA substitutes a pronovin 
for a redundamt noun. This fact accounts for the presence of the 
underlined pronotins in the sentences below ( notice that the English 
tramslation does ixst contain equivalent pronouns ) : 

ilkanaba ’the sofa* ?al i ?a?ad ?a Ikanaba *Ali sat on the sofa* 
i Ikanaba 11 i ?al i ?a?ad ?aleeha ’the sofa All sat'on* 

irriggaaia ’the men* + nawaal Saafit Irrlggaala ’Nawal saw the men* 
—•> irriggaaia lii nawaal Safit hum ’the men Hawal saw*' 

notes ; __ 

1. The pronominal subject of a verb is usually deleted; since the 
verb form indicates number, gender, auid person, the pro no mi n al 
subject is redundant. 

ana darast Iddars —> darast iddars *1 studied the lesson* 



EGymm Arabic 


93 


REFERENCE GRAMWR 


2^ If faduodant, a definite modified noun may be deleted leaving 
only the modifier in the place of the attributive construction. 
?and! tfimtzteen. Ittllmilza Imasriyya smaha satniira, 
wlttllmllza llurdunlyya smaha ?ayda, 

*1 have two students (f). The Egyptian student is called 
Samira, and the Jordanian student is called Aida.' 

> YandI tiimfzteen. I Imasriyya smaha samiira, wn?urduniyya 
smaha layda. 

'I have two students (f). The Egyptian (one) is called 
Samira, and the Jordeuiian (one) is called Aida.' 

_ *** *** 


EUSEWTf/G 


B nh ftdd ing is the process whereby a sentence is used to fill a slot 
in another sentence. Pot example, the sentence aSraf riqi? imbaarifi 
'Ashraf returned yesterday* contains an adverbial slot filled by 
imbaarifi 'yesterday'; the same slot may be filled by a-sentence : 
aSraf rigi? lamma zeenab rigYIt. 'Ashraf returned when Zeinab 

returned.' 

The sentence zeenab rig?it is sa i d to be onbedded in another sentencer 
Embedded sentences may be adverbial ( as illustrated above ), 
adjectival ( as in irraagil illi zeenab itoawwizitu 'the man whom 
Zeinab married' ), or nomina l ( as in simift innak bitfiTSbaha '1 
heard that you are in Idve with her* ) . 

If adverbial, the mnbedded expression is usually introduced by a 
subordinating conjunction; if adjectival euid modifying a defiiiite noun, 
it is introduced by illi ; if adjectival and modifying an indefinite 
noun, it is introduced by no particle; if ncminal, it is introduced 
by a ixsminalizer in certain caises and by no particle in others ( see 
"Ncminalization" ) : 

rigi? IaiiiniB zeenab rigfit. 'He returned ^en Zeinab returned' 

afraf iilustaaz iiIi 'I know the professor who 

biydarrisak. teaches you.* 


BSrniAN ARABIC 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 




a?raf ustaaz blydarrisak. 

s[mi?t Inn ?alI rIgIT. 
nia?raf5 byl^mll ee. 

*** *** 


*1 know a professor ^o teaches 
you. * 

*1 heard that All has returned.' 
'X do not know vdiat he is doing.' 

*** 


EMPKASIS 

( See : Consonant : Bnphatic ) 

EXCLmnONS and oaths / itta?aggub 

subftaan allaah 

• • 

allaah 
ya salaam 

allaah 

• • 

amma yarilba 
See? yarlib 
amma ?ag11ba 
See? ?agi{b 
ya salaam ?ala kida 

ya salaam Tala dammak 
ya Raw I iIlaah 
la Rawla wala quwwata Ilia 
billaah 
?aal 
mudhiS 
braavo 
?azfim 
wa 11aahI 

e • 

wiRyaat rabbina 


*** *** 

i IfiiIfaan / 

HOW wonderful, praise be to God ! 
Well 1 

Fancy that I; My 1; WOw 1 
How sweet I; Bravo t 
Strange i 
Strange 1 
Strange ! 

What a strange thing i 
How strange I How fancy ! How 
beautiful 1 

How silly of you I Shane on you ! 
What a loss ! 

What a loss I How helpless man is 1 

Excellent 1 
Excellent I 
Bravo t 
Excellent ! 

By God 1 Indeed I Really ! 

By God ! ( I swear ... ) 




EGVmAH AtiAStC 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


25 


Mfnnabi 

By God i By the Prophet 1(1 

swear ... ) 

winnabi ? 

Honestly ? 

fsta?glb 

to be amazed 

I stayrab 

to be amazed 

fifllf (t) 

to sweeu; 

ixx . Ixs 

• 

How disgusting 1 

txs ?aleak 

Shame on you 1 (ms) 

*** *** 

EXHORTATIVE PARTICLE 

The exhortative particle /yalla/ 'let's' is used in constructions 

before imperfect forms to 

mean 'let's (do such and such)!' 

yalla nlrnSl 

'Let's go 1' 

ya 1 [a b 1! na 

'Come on !, Let's ....' 


*** 




*iHt 





EGyPHAW ARABIC 


97 


REFERENCE GRAiWMAR 


- F - 


FEMININE NOUN IN CONSTRUCT 

Construct phraaes ^ere Ni is a feminine noun ending in-/-a/ . In 
this case, has a special form for the construct state (CS) , e.g., 
/?arablyya/ 'car' gives /7arabiyy?t nagwa/ 'Nagwa's car' and 
/suura/ 'picture' gives /suurlt safibi/ 'my friend's picture'. 

( Notice safibi 'my friend' is made definite by possession }. 

*** *** *** 


¥IAP 


Refers to a consonant produced by a single tap of the tongue in 
^ich the tip of the tongue makes a single rapid contact against the 
alveolar ridgef /•* r/ are flaps. 


*** 


*** 


*** 




EGynjAN ARABIC 


98 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


FORM VS. FUNCnON 

The terms "noun", "adjective", "verb", and "adverb" designate certain 
forms . On the other hand, the terms "nominal", "adjectival", "verbal", 
and "adverbial" designate functions ( or slots ). Nominal slots are 
typically filled by nouns, adjectival slots are typically filled by 
adjectives, verbal slots are typically filled by verbs, and adverbial 
slots are typically filled by adverbs. It must be stressed, however, 
that there is no one-to-one correlation between form and function ; 
for example, a nominal slot may be filled by a sentence rather than 
a noun { see ; "Nbminalization" ). In the first example below, the 
underlined sentence fills the subject slot; in the second example, 
the underlined sentence fills the object slot ; 

i nnu yingafS mi§ mufitamal. 'That he will succeed is not probable.' 
si mitt inn ?al i r igi? . 'I heard that Ali has returned.' 

*** it*it itlt* 


FREQUENTATIVE FORM 

Consists of the imperfect (q.v.) form plus the frequentative 
prefix /bi-/. It expresses a habitual, repeated action, e.g., 

biyruuh ilmaktab kull yoom. 'He goes to the office every day.' 
or an action vAiich is simultaneous with regard to the time of speech 
or another definite moment ( progressive aspect ), e.g., 

biyzaakir dilwa?ti. 'He is studying now.' 

Witii verbs of motion, e.g., /miii/ 'to go', the Frequentative 
never has a progressive meaning, e.g., 

biyimSi min hina liimaktab. 'He walks from here to the office.' 
The Frequentative is also referred to as the Durative . 




*** 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


99 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


FREQUENTATIVE PARTICLE 

/b\-/, the frequenhative particle, is prefixed to the imperfect 
(q.v.) to derive the frequentative form (q.v.). This particle has 
the variant forms /bi-/ after a consonant and /b-/ after a vowel, 
e.g., 

llbJnt btiktib 'the girl writes' 

samiir biyiktib 'Samir writes' 

Inta btIktIb 'You (ms) write* 

*** *** *** 

FRICATIVE 

Refers to consoiumts produced by friction caused by the air moving 
through a xuunrow passage in the vocal tract / fvsszzS^XYf* 

9 h /. 

*** *** *** 

FRONT VCOIEL 

A vowel that is produced by arching the tongue to the front of 
the palate. He can, for example, say that /!/ is a high front vowel. 


*** 


*** 


*** 





EGVmAN ARABIC 


101 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


6 


6EMPER 


In Egyptian AreUsic (EA ), nouns (n) are either masculine (m) or 
femi n i n e (f) in gender, e.g., walad (m) 'boy' bint (f) 'girl'. 
Henceforth, gender indicators will not be entered for those nouns 
where the sex of the referent clearly indicates the grammatical 
gender _as in ths_ex2UEples alsove. 

lUijectives (adj) show two genders, e.g., nabiih (m) 'intelligent', 
nab Iiha (f) 'intelligent'. 

Compare the following nouns 6u:td adjectives : 

taal Ib (m) taaliba (f) 'student' 

nabilh (m) nabiiha (f) 'intelligent* 

Notice that the great majority of singular (s) f em inine nouns and 
adjectives end in /-s/. Exceptions to this will be indicated by (f). 
Masculine singular nouns and adjectives will thus be identifiable by 
the absence of /-a/ or by the insertion of (m). This convmtion of 
indicating gender for singular forms will :be followed regularly. Thus 
taalib 'student' and taaliba 'student' have no gender indicators, since 
it is clear that the first word is masculine and the second is feminine. 
Indicators, however, will be altered next to items such as ard (f) 'land' 
and mabna (m) 'building* since their endings do not follow the. rule 
above. 

C See also : Demonstratives; Plural; Nisba Adjectives; Agreement in 
Construct. Phrases ) 


*** 


•** 


*** 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


102 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


GENVER : PRESENTATIONAL PARTICLES 


aho (ms), ahe (fs) 'here is' and ahom (p) 'here are' are here re¬ 
ferred to as Presentational Particles . The singular particles agree 
in gender with the singular noun referred to, e.g., 

aho ttaalib innabiih. 'Here is the intelligent student (m) . ' 

ahe ttaaliba nnabiiha. 'Here is the intelligent student (f). ' 

ahom ittu[laab innubaha. 'Here are the intelligent students (m) 

ahom ittaalibaat innubaha. 'Here are the intelligent students (f) 


GLIVE 


A Glide is a transitional sound produced when the vocal organs shift 
from the articulation of one sound ( usually a vowel ) to the articula¬ 
tion of another ( vowel ) sound. The glides in EA are /w/ and /y/. 
Glides are vocoids phonemicized as consonants. 

GLOTTAL 


A place of articulation in the glottis ( opening at upper part of 
the windpipe between the vocal cords ) : /?, h/ are glottal consonants. 
The consonant /?/ glottal stop is produced by complete closure and re¬ 
lease of the vocal cords. The consonant /h/ is produced by the flow 
of air through the open vocal cords. 

* ** * ** * ** 

GLOTTAL STOP 

The consonant /?/ glottal stop is produced by complete closure and 
release of the vocal cords ( glottis ). It is sometimes found in 
English as in New York City dialect pronunciation /bo?l/ 'bottle' or 
as in the initial sound of English 'ouch' before the ou , or between 
the two vowels of 'uh-oh'. From the phonetic point of view, EA has only 



EGyPriAW ARABIC 


103 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


one glottal stop. From the distributional point of view there are 
two word-initial glottal stops : the non-elidible and the elidible . 
Both are discussed below. 

1. The non-elidible glottal stop is never deleted. EA words 
which contain this glott 2 il stop usually correspond to Modern 
Steindard Arabic words which begin with /q/ : 

Egyptian Arabic Standard Arabic 

?alb 'heeurt* qalb 

?aam 'to rise* qaam 

?atal 'to kill' qatal 

Also nouns of the patterns ?vCCaaC ( e.g., /?asmaa?/ 'names' ) 
and ?vCaaC ( e.g., /?imaan/ 'faith' ) do not usually elide 
the initial glottal stop. 

2. The elidible glottal stop is deleted from a word that is 
pronounced in close association with a preceding word or 
prefix, especially in fast speech : 

/kitaab/ + /?ibni/ —[kitaab ibni] 'my son's book' 
Such common forms as the personal pronouns ( /?ana/ '!', 
/?Inta/ 'you (ms)', etc. ), the marker of first person 
singular imperfect verbs /?a-/ amd the particles /?aywa/ 
'yes', /?ah6/ 'here it (m) is', /?ahe/ 'here it (f) it' 
are paurticularly susceptible to such elision. Compare 
/?ahwa/ ( /? = q/ ) 'coffee' and /?ana/ '!' in the following 
examples ( [ ] denotes actual pronunciation ) : 

/iiribt ^ ?ahwa/ —Isiribt ^ ?ahwa] 'I drank coffee' 
/Siribt ^ ?ana/ —> [Siribt ana] 'I drauak' 

Sometimes deletion of the elidible glottal stop results in 
the elision of a short vowel ; 

/mafa/ + /?ibni/ —^ [ma?a] + [ibni] —[ma?a bni] 
'with my son' 

In two instances, the glottal stop almost always elides : 
in the relative pronoun : 

/?illi/ [illi] —> [lli] 'who, vrtiich, that' 

and the definite article : 

/?il-/—) [il-l—> II-] 'the' 



EGYPT JAN ARABIC 


104 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


For example : 

/?ilfiaaga ?i11 i mafaak/ —[?ilftaaga II i miaak] 

'the thing that you have' 

/darab ?ilwalad/ —[darab ilwaiad] 'he hit the boy' 
/rama ?nkitaab/ — ^ [ratna Ikitaab] 'he threw the book' 

Note that ER. words or utterances never begin with a vowel, 
vrtiether short or long- When an EA word is heard to begin with 
a vowel this means that the initial glottal stop has been 
elided. 

Deletion of the elidible glottal stop does not take place in 
the following situations ; 

a. If the identity of a word or an expression would be 
obscured. Thus 

Aawza/ + /?adxul/ = [Tawza ?adxul] 'I (f) want to enter-' 

( no deletion takes place to keep the sentence distinct 
from [Tawz adxul] 'I (m) want to enter.* ) 

b. If the word containing the glottal stop in question is 
emphatic; compare [min awwiI yoom] 'since the first day' 
and [min ?Swwil yoom] ( where ' represents extra heavy 
stress ) 'since the very first day'. 

c. If deletion of the glottal stop would result in two 
adjacent long vowels : 

/liih/ + /?aaxir/ = [liih ?aaxir] 'it has am end.' 

*** *** *** 


GRAPHEME 

A meaningful unit of the writing system of a language that distinguishes 
one lexeme ( q.v. ) or word from another, e.g., English /b/ and /t/ in 
'boy' and 'toy'; Egyptian Arabic V /b/ and /t/ in '-r^ baab 'door' 
and (—I; taab 'to repent'. Also referred to as "letter". 


*•* 


*** 


•** 



EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


105 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- H - 


WAAL ftaaI 


A Ftaa I is a modifier which indicates the state or condition of the 
noxin modified at the time of the main clause. Consider for example 
the following sentences : 

1. salwa naamit qaTaana . 'Salwa slept hungry' 

2. fariida §aafit Tumar miFitaar . 'Farida saw Omar perplexed.' 

In sentence 1, the word qa Taana 'hungry' indicates Salwa's state as 
she slept. In sentence 2, the word miFttaar indicates Omar's state 
when Farida saw him. 

A Ftaa I may also indicate the external circimistances surrounding 
the noun modified at the time of the main clause, as opposed to 
the state or condition of the subject or the object itself. 

siFiiit widdinya I issa dalma . 'I woke up while it was still 

dark.' 

The Fiaa I may be a single word, a phrase, or a clause consisting 
of an explicit subject and a predicate; in the last case, the Fiaa I 
is always introduced by the particle ^ which is often translatable 
by 'while, as, when' : 

Ta I i rig i ? Fiaz i i n. 

T a I I r i g i C y i d Fia k. 

?a I i rigiT wi huwwa Fiaziin. 


'Ali returned sad.' 

'Ali returned laughing. 
'Ali returned sad.' 



EGVVTIAM ARABIC 


106 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Tali rigiT wi mTaah fluus kitiir. 'All returned with a lot of money. 

Tali rigiT winta bt i st a Fiamma . 'Ali returned while you were 

taking a bath.' 

If the EaaI is a verb, it is usually a present-tense form denoting 
progressive action. 

*** *** *** 

HARP PALATE 

The hard palate is the portion of the roof of the mouth behind the 
alveolar ridge. 

*** *** *** 

HELPING t/OWEL 

( See : Vowel : Extra ) 

*** *★* 

HIGH VOWEL 

A vowel that is produced with the tongue arched high in the mouth. 

The EA high vowels are /\/ and /u/. 

*** *** *** 

HOLLOW VERB 

( See : Verb ; Classification by Root Type ) 






**★ 




EGVVnAM ARABIC 


107 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- I - 


IMPERATIl/E : FORMATION 

Imperative forms are yielded by the corresponding second-person 
subjunctive forms. The traceability of the imperative form to the 
subjunctive is not surprising since the latter denotes possibility 
( as opposed to fact ) and since a command or a request falls with¬ 
in the realm of possibility. 

A second-person subjunctive form always begins with /t/ ; the 
imperative results from deleting that /\/ and the vowel which follows 
it; if this would result in a word-initial consonant cluster, only 
the /t/ is deleted. 


Subjunctive 

Imperative 



(inta) 

t i ruufi 

ruuFi 

'go ! ' 

(ms) 

(inti) 

t iruuhi 

ruu8 i 

'go ! ' 

(fs) 

(i ntu) 

t i ruuFiu 

ruufiu 

'go ! ' 

(P) 


(inta) 

t i saawir 

?aawir 

'consult ! 

' (ms) 

(inti) 

t ilawri 

?awri 

'consult ! 

' (fs) 

(intu) 

t i sawru 

Sawru 

'consult ! 

' (P) 

(inta) 

t I 93 1 1 im 

9a1 1 i m 

'teach 

{ 1 

(ms) 

(inti) 

t i 9a11imi 

9a11imi 

'teach 

! ' 

(fs) 

(i ntu) 

t i 9a11imu 

9a11imu 

'teach 

1 1 

(p) 




EGyPTIM ARABIC 


108 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


Notes 


(inta) 

tuxrug 


uxrug 

'go out ! 

' (ms) 


(inti) 

tuxrugi 


uxrugi 

'go out ! 

' (fs) 


(intu) 

tuxrugu 


uxrugu 

'go out ! 

' (p) 


(inta) 

titnaazi1 


i tnaazi1 

'relinquish I' 

(ms) 

(i nt i) 

t itnazii 


i tnaz 1 i 

'relinquish !' 

(fs) 

(intu) 

t itnazlu 


itnaz1u 

'relinquish !' 

(p) 

(inta) 

t i kt i b 


i kt i b 

'write !' 

(ms) 


(int i) 

t i kt i bi 


i kt i b i 

'write !' 

(fs) 


(intu) 

t i kt i bu 


i kt i bu 

'write !' 

(P) 


The subjunctive forms 

for 'you come' 

' are tiig 

_i_ (ms) , 

t i ig 

and tiigu 

(p). Rather 

than 

the expected *gi 

and *gu 

, EA 

uses ta 9aala, 'come !' 

(ms) 

, ta?aa1 I 

i 'come !' 

(fs) , 

and ti 

'come !' 

(p). 







The subjunctive forms for 'you bring' are tigiib (ms), tigiibi 
(fs), and tigiibu (p). The corresponding imperative forms are 
haat , haat i , aind haatu ( although glib , g i i b i , and g i i bu are 
used occasionally ) : 


haat/giib iIkitaab 
mafaak bukra ya Tali 
haat/giibi bintik 
ma ?aa ki 

haatu/giibu asdiqa?kum 
ma ?aakum 


'Bring the book with you 
tomorrow, Ali.' 

'Bring your daughter with 
you (fs).' 

'Bring your friends with 
you (p).' 


In addition, the forms haat , haat i , and haatu are used with the 
meaning 'give me'. In this context haat and haat i are inter¬ 
changeable with iddiini , while haatu is interchangeable with 
i dduuni. 




EGyPHAN ARABIC 


109 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


haat/ iddiini ?alafn ya ?ali. 'Give me a pencil, Ali.' 
haati/iddiini Ikitaab 'Give me the book, Farida.' 

ya fariida. 

haatu/idduuni Ikutub 'Give me the books, children.' 

ya wlaad. 


3. The in?>erative forms itfadda1 (ms), itfaddaI i (fs) , and 

itfadda lu (p) denote a polite invitation of any kind. Trans¬ 
latable by 'be so kind eis ( to do or accept something ) the 


three forms may be used with or 

itfaddaI ( said by someone 
who is eating ) 
itfaddaI ( said upon open¬ 
ing the door ) 
itfadda I ( pointing to a 
chair } 

itfaddaI istirayyafi ya ?ali. 
itfadda!i u??udi ya 
suzaan. 

itfaddaiu 5aay ya 
asadza. 


without an object ; 

'Please come and eat with me.' 

'Please come in.' 

'Please sit down.' 

'Please sit down, Ali.' 

'Please sit down, Susan.' 

'Please have some tea, 
professors.' 


*** *** *** 


IMPERATIVE : IMPERATIVE FORMS IN THE VERB SEQUENCE 

A verbal sequence which does not include kaan is made imperative in 
the following manner : 

1. If it is a Class III auxiliary ( see : Verb : Auxiliaries ), the 
first verb assumes the ia^ierative form; in addition, the second 
verb assumes the imperative form. If there is another verb in 
the sequence, that verb is a bare imperfect form : 




EGYPT!M ARABIC 


110 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


i t ?a I I i m t i kt i b . ' Leam how to write. ' 

ibtidi titTallim tiktib. 'start learning how to write.’ 
i?bal t ibtidi titTallim 'Agree to start learning how 
tiktib. to write.' 

i?bal t ibtidi truufi 'Agree to start going to leam 

tit?a I I im tiktib. how to write.’ 

i?bal yibtidi yruuft. 'Agree ( to the proposition ) 

that he should go.' 

All of the above verbal sequences may be preceded by a 
second-person perfect form of kaan ( the form in question 
is usually translatable by 'you'd have done well to ...' ) ; 

kunt ruuh itTallim 'You'd (ms) have done well to go 

sanTa. leam a trade. ' 

kunti ruuFii tTallimi 'You'd (fs) have done well to go 

faransaawi. learn French.' 

kuntu ruuFiu fTallimu 'You'd (p) have done well to go 

sanTa. learn a trade.' 

kunt itTallim tiktib 'You’d (ms) have done well to 

Tarabi. leam how to write Arabic.' 

kunti tTailimi tiktibi 'You'd (fs) have done well to 
Farabi. learn how to write Arabic.' 

kuntu tTallimu tiktibu 'You'd (p) have done well to 

Tarabi. leam how to write Arabic.' 

The imperative verb iwTa ( feminine : iwTi , plural iw?u ) may 

introduce a verbal sequence to denote a warning or an admonition 
against something; the sequence in question may or may not contain 
a form of kaan : 

1. If it occurs in the verbal sequence, kaan follows iw?a and 
is a bare imperfect form. A verb which immediately follows 
kaan is an imperfect form with an aspect prefix; any other 
verb in the sequence is a bare imperfect form. 




EGVPTIM ARABIC 


111 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


iwTa tkuun Tayyaan. 


iw?i tkuuni 
bitfiibbi i. 

iw9u tkuunu (Satibtidu 
t idrisu turki. 


'I hope you (ms) are not sick.' 
Literally : "Be mindful of the 
possibility that you (ms) are 
sick." 

'I hope you (fs) are not in 
love with him.' Literally : "Be 
mindful of the possibility that 
you (fs) are in love with him." 

'I hope you (p) are not going 
to start studying Turkish.' 
Literally : "Be mindful of the 
possibility that you (p) will 
start to study Turkish." 


iw?a ykuun Tayyaan. 'I hope he is not sick.' Liter¬ 

ally : "You (ms) take heed lest 
he should be sick." 

iw?i ykuun biyRibbik. 'I hope he is not in love with 

you (fs).' Literally : "Take 
heed lest he should be in love 
with you (fs)." 

iw?u ykuunu Fiayibtidu 'I hope they are not going to 
yidrisu turki. start studying Turkish.' Liter¬ 

ally : "You (p) taike heed lest 
they should be going to start 
studying Turkish." 

2. If kaan does not occur in the verbal sequence, all the verbs 
which follow iw?a are bare imperfect ( = subjunctive ) forms : 

iwTa tgiibu. 'Make sure you (ms) do not bring 

him.' 

'Make sure you (fs) do not go to 
meet him.' 


iwTi truufii t?ablii. 



EGVVTTAM ARABIC 


112 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


iw?u tibtidu truuBu 
t idrisu turki. 


'Make sure you (p) do not start 
to study Turkish.' 


iw?a yiigi. 

iwTi yruuFi yi?abilha. 

iw?u yibtidu yruuRu 
yidrisu turki. 


'You (ms) make sure he does not 
come.' 

'You (fs) make sure he does not 
go to meet her.' 

'You (p) make sure that they do 
not start to study Turkish.' 


The imperative i w?a may co-occur v.’ith a negative verb : 


iw?a matirga?!. 'Make sure you return.' 

Literally : "Guard against not 
returning." 


*** **★ *** 


IMPERATIt/E : NEGATIVE 

A negative imperative form 
person form plus the affixes 
t ikt i b 
ma-t i kt i b-S 

t i kt i b i 
ma-tiktibii-l 

tiktibu 
ma-tiktibuu-S 

The affirmative imperative forms 
taTaaIi (fs), and taTaaIu (p); the 


consists of the subjunctive second- 
ma-.. .-1 : 

'you (ms) write' 

'don't write ( addressing a male )' 
'you (fs) write' 

'don't write ( addressing a female )' 

'you (p) write' 

'don't write ( addressing more than 
one ) ' 

of yi igi 'to come' are ta?aaI a (ms) 
corresponding negative imperatives 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


113 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


are matqiiS (ms, fs) and matquus (p). 

Neither the negative nor the affirmative imperative form of kaan 
occurs in a verbal sequence; for this reason, the following comments 
are restricted to verbal sequences which include no form of kaan . 

A verbal sequence may consist of only two members. If the first 
verb of such a sequence is negative imperative the second is an 
affirmative second-person bare form. If the second verb is negative, 
the first is an affirmative imperative form : 

mati?baii truuFi. 'Don't agree to go.' 

i?bal matruFiS. 'Agree not to go.' 

A verbal sequence may consist of more than two verbs. If the first 
verb of such a sequence is a negative imperative, the rest are affirm¬ 
ative second-person bare (subjunctive) forms. If a verb other than the 
first is negative, the first is an affirmative imperative, and the 
rest are affirmative second person bare (subjunctive) forms : 

mati?bal^ truuFi 'Do not agree to go to learn.' 

t i t ?a I 1 i m. 

i?bal matruhS 'Agree not to go to learn.' 

tit?alIim. 

As the English translation shows, negating different constituents 
of the verbal sequence does not result in synonymous expressions. 

Most situations call for negating only the first verb : 

mati?bal§ tibtidi 'Don't agree to start going.' 

truuFi. 

A verbal sequence may contain one of the forms iw?a ( used 
in addressing a male ), iw?i ( used in addressing a female ), and 
i w?u ( used in addressing more than one person ). The three forms 
in question imply undesirable consequences and are best translated 
by 'you'd better not ( do something )' 

iw?a truuFi maTaaha. 'Make sure you (ms) do not go 

with her.' 

iw?! truuFii mafaaha. 'Make sure you (fs) do not go 

with her.' 




EGyPTJM ARABIC 


114 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


iwTu truuBu maTaaba. 

A negative imperative form may 
same verbal sequence : 

iw?a matrufti t?ablu. 

iw?i ti?bali matrufiiiS. 

iWTu matFiawluul 
tihrabu. 


'Make sure you (p) do not go with 
her.' 

follow iw?a , iw?i , or iwTu in the 

'You'd better not fail to go to 
meet him.' 

'You'd better not agree not to 

go.' 

'You'd better not fail to attempt 
to escape.' 


*** *** *** 


IMPERATIVE : RESPONSES 

The following five expressions are commonly used in responding to a 
request; they are interchangeable in most situations, and the idiomatic 
translation in each case is 'gladly' : 


1. 

Fiaad i r. 

( literally : 

"(It's) Ready" ) (invariable) 

2. 

biku11 sruur. 

( literally : 

"With every pleasure" ) 

3. 

Tala Ceeni wraasi. 

( literally : 

"On my eye and my head 1" 


with the cultural implication that 
whatever is placed on the eye or 
the head is an obligation that can¬ 
not be taken lightly ) 

4. yaali wittalab rixiis. ( literally : "You are dear and the 

request is inexpensive" ) 

5. amrak. ( literally : "Your order" ) 

*** *** *** 



EGYPTIAM ARABIC 


115 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


mPERAJlVE : SOCIAL USAGE 


The following sentences contain imperative verbs : 


u?af gamb ilbaab. 
ruufii masr. 

istaTiddu IiI IimtiBaan. 
i?ru Imaqaala kwayyis. 


•stand (ms) next to the door.' 
•Go (fs) to Egypt.' 

•Get ready (p) for the test.' 
•Read (p) the article well.' 


Although perfectly grammatical, the above sentences have restricted 
usage; they occur in one of the following situations : 

1. When the speaker considers the addressee less than an equal. 

2. When the speaker and the addressee are on familiar terms. 

In formal situations, and when addressing equals or superiors, the 


speaker usually employs one of the 
a request : 

1. A question introduced by the 
ti?dari , plural : ti?daru ) 

t i smafi ( feminine : t i smafi i , 

ti?dar tigibli kubbaayit 
mayya ? 

ti?dari tSufiili huwwa 
feen ? 

t ismaFiu t i igu ba?d 
idduhr ? 

2. A question introduced by the 

mumkin tu?Cud ?a kkursi 
ttaani ? 

mumkin titbafiili ggawaab 
da ? 

mumkin tigiibu kutubkum 
ma?aakum bukra ? 


following structures to express 

auxiliary 1: i?dar ( feminine : 
could you' or the auxiliary 
plural : tismabu ) 'would you': 

'Could you (ms) bring me a 
glass of water ?' 

'Could you (fs) find him for 
me ?' 

'Would you (p) come in the 
afternoon ?' 

modal mumkin 'could' : 

'Could you (ms) sit on the 
other chair ?' 

'Could you (fs) type this 
letter for me ?' 

'Could you (p) bring your 
books with you tomorrow ?' 




EGyTTJAN ARABIC 


116 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


3. An iii 5 >erative construction combined with the polite ea^ression 
min fadlak ( feminine ; min fad I Ik , plural ; min fadlukum ) 
'please*. Less common than min fadlak , but equivalent to it 
in meaning, are the following expressions : wi Fiyaatak ( femi¬ 
nine ; wifiyaatlk , plural : w ifiyatkum ), winnabi , ITmi I 
ma^ruuf ( feminine : i?mi 11 maTruuf , plural : i?mi I u maYruuf ), 
yinuubak sawaab ( feminine ; yinuubik sawaab , plural: 
yinubkum sawaab, law samafit ( feminine : I aw samafit i , plural 
law samalStum ) ; 

iftafi llbaab min fadlak 
ya fall, 

Iftafii min fad Iik ya 
fariida. 

hatii11 fingaaI ?ahwa 
ynuubik sawaab ya 
fatfiiyya. 

iddi ini kkitaab da 
winnabi ya fiasan, 

uskutu ya wlaad ifmilu 
mafruuf. 

4. One of the questions described in #1 and #2 above, combined 
with one of the polite expressions listed in #3 : 

ti?dar tigibli fingaal 'Could you (ms) please bring 

?ahwa min fadlak ? me a cup of coffee ?' 

mumkin titbafiili ggawaab 'Could you (fs) please type this 
da winnabi 7 letter for me ?' 

**• *** *** 


'Please open the door, Ali.' 

'Please open ( the door ) , 
Farida.' 

'Please bring me a cup of 
coffee, Fathia.' 

'Please give me this book, 
Hasan.' 

'Please be quiet, children,' 


IMPERATIVE : SUPPLEMENTARV NOTES 


1. The English expression "make so and so do such and such' is 
paralleled in EA by a construction which consists of the 



EGyPHAW ARABIC 


117 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


following units in the order given : 

(a) One of the imperative forms xa I I i ( ms or fs ) and xa 11 u (p) 
'make, have (someone do something) '. 

(b) A noun or a third-person pronominal suffix functioning as 
subject of the following verb. 

(c) A bare in?)erfect (subjxanctiveX verb. 

The following are examples : 

ya ?ali, xalll farild yiruufi. 'Ali, make Farid go.' 
ya samifra, xaltii yruuF. 'Samira, make him go.' 
ya asadza, xailu talamzitkum 'Teachers, make yo^lr students 
yinaddafu llooda. clean up the room.' 

The same constructicxi can mean 'let ( i.e., allow ) so and so to do 
such and such'; here, however, constituent (b) may be a noun, a first- 
person pronominal suffix, or a third-person pronominal stiffix : 


ya far!id, xalli suzaan 
tiruufi. 

ya amaal, xalliini asaYdik. 

ya wIaad, xa11iihum 
yil?abu m?aakum. 


'Farid, let Susan go ( i.e., 
allow Susan to go ).' 

'Amal, let me help you ( i.e., 
allow me to help you ).' 

'Children, let them play with 
you { i.e., allow them to play 
with you ).' 


2. The English construction with let's corresponds to an Arabic 
construction consisting of yaI la and a following first-person 
plural verb : 


yalla nirga?. 'Let's return.' 

yalla nl?li ssamak. 'Let's fry the fish.' 

The sequence signal ma often occurs in contexts which denote 
commands or requests. All verbs which follow trra in such 
contexts are bare, iit 5 )erfect, second-person forms : 


3. 




EGWriAN ARABIC 


118 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


ma t?uum ya Tali, 
ma t?uumi ya suzaan. 
ma ■t?uumu ya wlaad. 
ma t?uum taakul ya fariid. 


'Come on. All, get up !' 

'Come on, Susan, get up !' 

'Come on, children, get up !' 

'Come on, Farid, get up and eat !' 


The form is called a sequence signal because it may relate the 
sentence to a preceding portion of the discourse. Thus ma_ t?uum 
taakuI indicates annoyance at having to repeat the invitation. 

*** *** *** 


TWPEFIWIlt PHRASE 

( See : Phrase Versus Sentence ) 

*** *** **■* 


INVEEINITE SUBJECT 

In EA, the subject of a sentence is usually definite : 

iIkitaab ?a ttarabeeza. 'The book is on the table.' 

TaIi fiI beet. 'All is at home.' 

inti min masr ? 'Are you from Egypt ?' 

There are relatively few types of sentences with an indefinite subject; 

they consist of two groups : 

1. Sentences whose predicate contains or consists of the word fii ~ 
fiih 'there is/are ( denoting existence )'; an example is 

* i laah fiih which, as will become clear from the discussion 
below, is the abstract source string for fiih iIaah 'There is 
a God.' 

2. Sentences whose predicate neither contains nor consists of the 
word f i i ~ f i i h ; an exait^le is ka I b fiayy ahsan min asad mayyit 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


119 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


'A living dog is more useful ( literally : "better" ) than a 
dead lion.' 

Sentences of the first group occur with the predicate preceding 
the subject; thus the source string * i laah fiih undergoes an inver¬ 
sion transformation which produces fiih iIaah 'There is a God.' 

The inversion transformation in question is not applicable to sen¬ 
tences of the second group. 

Sentences of the first group may be divided into the following 
sub-groups : 

(a) Sentences where fii ~ fiih is followed by a modifier 
denoting place or possession. In the examples below, only 
the abstract source strings are given and the actual sentences 
will be derived later : 

* kitaab fiih ^ 'There is a book on the table.' 

ttarabeeza . 

* saa9a fiih Tand i . 'I have a watch.' 

* dahr fiih Iiina . 'We have backing.' 

(b) Sentences where fii ~ fiih is not followed by a modifier 
denoting place or possession. In the examples below, only 
the abstract source strings are given : 

* ilaah fiih. 'There is a God.' 

* kitaab Tan masr fiih. 'There is a book about Egypt.' 

* sitt btixbiz fiih. 'There is a woman who is baking.' 

To produce concrete sentences ( i.e., sentences which are actually 
pronounced by speakers ), the abstract strings of sub-group (a) undergo 
one of the transformations described below : 

1. The constituent fii ~ fiih is transposed to initial position : 

* kitaab fiih Ta ttarabeeza -> fiih kitaab Ta ttarabeeza 

'There is a book on the table.' 

* saaTa fiih Tandi -> fiih saaTa Tandi 

'I have a watch.' 

* dahr fiih liina -> fiih dahr 1iina 

'We have backing.' 




EGyPTIAM ARABIC 


120 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


2. The modifier is transposed to initial position and the mini- 

mxim predicate f i i ~ f i i h is deleted : 

* kitaab fiih Ta ttarabeeza-'> “Ta ttarabeeza kiaab 

'There is a book on the table.' 

* saaTa fiih Tandi -> ?andi saa9a 

'I have a watch.' 

* dahr fiih 1iina -> liina dahr 

'We have backing.' 

To produce concrete sentences, the abstract strings of sub¬ 
group (b) undergo a transformation which transposes the predicate 

fii - fiih to initial position : 

* Ilaah fiih -> fiih ilaah 

'There is a God' 

* kitaab ?an masr fiih -^ fiih kitaab Tan masr 

'There is a book about Egypt' 

* sitt btixbiz fiih -> fiih sitt btixbiz 

'There is a woman who is baking.' 

*** *** *★* 


IMVEFEMVEMT PERSOMAL PROMOUNS 

( See : Pronoun : Personal ) 

*** *** *** 


IMVICATIf/E MOOV 

The indicative verb predicates an actual occurence or fact ( as 
opposed to a wish, a conjecture, or a possibility ). The actual 
occurence or fact may be either static , habitual , or progressive . 


as well as, according to the context, past, present, or future, e.g.. 




EGmiAN ARABIC 


121 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


/kaan biyiktib/ 

/fiaykuun biyiktib/ 
/biyiktib ?arabi kwayyis/ 


'he was writing' 

'he will be writing' 
'he writes Arabic well 
(script or language)' 

*** 


INTENSIFIER 

Adverbs, interjections and other phrases that express a greater degree 


o£ something. Examples ; 

?awi 
xaaI i s 
giddan 
kiti ir 
abadan 

mutaSakklr xaalis 
mutalakkir ?awi 
mutalakkir giddan 

_i nn oom kitii r wifiiS ?awi 

?umrak Siribt ilwiski ? 
abadan 

abadan xaalis ? 

Tumri 

?umri ma §ribt sagaayir. 

iIfiamdu IiIlaah Tumri 
malribtiS sagaayir abadan. 
iIbint di fiiIwa ?awi, 
garniila giddan. 
inta akramtini ktiir ?awi, 
wana mutalakkir giddan. 
imbaariFi mill it ?alra miil. 
Taira miil mil kitiir ?awi. 
la izzaay ! 

braavo I kuwayyis giddan. 


very 

very 

very 

a lot ( after verbs or nouns) 

never, not at all { independent or 

_ , , with negative verb ) 

Thank you very much. 

Thank you very much. 

Thank you very much. 

Sleeping a lot is very bad. 

Have you ever drunk whiskey ? 

Never 

Never ever at all ? 

Never ( in my whole life ) 

I have never smoked cigarettes 
( Note ; EA "drink" cigarettes ) 

Thank God, I never ever smoked 
at all. 

This girl is very pretty, 
very beautiful. 

You were very hospitable to me, 
and I am very obliged to you. 

Yesterday I walked for ten miles. 

Ten miles is not very much. 

Oh, come on ! 

Bravo, very good ! 



EGypTJAN ARABIC 


122 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


INTERROGATIVE 

( See : Questions : Alternative Questions, 
Questions : Information Questions, 
Questions : Tags, 

Questions : Yes-or-No Questions ) 


INTERROGATJVES 


A word or a phrase used to ask questions. The most common inter¬ 
rogative s in Egyptian Arabic are : 


eeh ? 

'what ?' 


feen ? 

'where ?' 


(Tala) feen ? 

'to where 

? ' 

mineen ? 

'from where ?' 

leeh ? 

■why ?' 


emta ? 

'when ?' 


TalaSaan eeh ? 

'what for 

? * 

mi in ? 

'who ?' 


eeh ? 

'which ?' 


bitaaT mi in ? 

'whose ?' 


1imiin ? 

'whose ?' 


kaam ? 

'how many 

? how much ?' 

bikaam ? 

'how much 

? ( price )' 

?add eeh ? 

'how long 

( distance ) ? 

izzaay ? 

'how ?' 


ha 1 ? 

'did, will ?' ( question 


*** 


* ** 





EGYPTIAtJ ARABIC 


123 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- L - 


LABIOVENTAL 

A place of articulation consisting of the lower lip and upper 
teeth ; /f v/. 


★ ★★ *★* 


LATERAL 


Refers to a consonant produced with the tongue touching only the 
middle of the palate, thus allowing the air flow to escape around one 
or both sides of the tongue : /I !/• 

*** *** **★ 


LEXEME 


Also referred to as Lexical Item or Lexical Form or Word or 
Vocabulary Item or Dictionary Entry or Citation Form . 

*** *** 


LEXICON 


A list of ( all or certain ) words in a language. 


•kick 


k*k 


*** 




EGYVnAN ARABIC 


124 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


LINKAGE 


In many cases, word and syllable boundaries do not coincide in EA. 
birdcage is the formation of a syllable using the last phoneme (s) of 
one word cuid the initial phoneme of the following word. If we look 
at /?i I gum I a gdiida/ 'the sentence is new' in terms of sylledDle and 
word boundaries, we get /?il - gum - 1^ - dii - da/ ( " - " here 
represents syllable boundary and ^ represents linkage between words ). 
The most difficult part for a non-native speaker is the end of the 
first word and the beginning of the second word where linkage occurs : 
here, /lag/. This is particularly difficult in rapid speech. 

*** *** 


LONG i/OWEL 

( See : Vowels ) 


♦** *** *** 


LOW VOWEL 

A vowel which is produced with the tongue arched low in the mouth. 
The EA low vowel is /a/. 


*** 


*** *** 



EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


125 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- M - 


MANNER ADVERBS 


( See : Adverbs of Manner ) 


*** ★** *** 


MASOAR 


A term used by Arab grammarians to refer to the Verbal Noun (q.v.)- 

**★ ★** 


MEASURES : DEFINITION 


Compare the following words : 


Fiamm i s 

'to 

make ( someone ) 

enthusiastic 

katt ib 

•to 

make ( someone ) 

write' 

sa1 1 i m 

'to 

greet' 


sabbib 

'to 

cause' 



Although they have different roots, the words in question are structur¬ 
ally similar since each consists of the following elements in the order 
given : an initial radical, the vowel /a/, a doubled radical, the 
vowel /i/, and a final radical. Using F, £, and L as cover symbols 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


126 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


for any initial radical, any medial radical, and any final radical 
respectively, the shared structure may be represented as FaT?iL . 
Thus FaT^iL is a generalized shape which stands for all words of a 
given structxire; such generalized shapes are called "measures". 

Measures are usually associated with particular meanings in 
contrast with the lexical meanings of roots; for example, the verb 
measure Fa??iL frequently indicates causation ( katt ib 'to make 
someone write' ); the noun measure Faa?iL frequently indicates the 
doer { kaat I b 'writer' ); and the noun measure maF?aL frequently 
indicates place ( maktab 'office' ) . 

In addition to their particular meanings, measures also have a 
lexical designation; for example, the measure FaTiiL frequently 
designates high-ranking positions while Fa7?aaL frequently desig¬ 
nates lowly occupations : 


wazi i r 

' (cabinet) minister' 

ami ir 

'prince' 

?aq i i d 

'colonel' 

naq i ib 

'chairman of a guild' 

saf i i r 

'ambassador' 

tab i i b 

'medical doctor' 

9amiid 

'dean' 

hammaar 

'donkey driver' 

gazzaar 

'butcher' 

layyaa1 

'porter' 

naggaar 

'carpenter' 

fal laaFi 

'farmer' 

sabbaak 

'smelter' 

xabbaaz 

'baker' 

Ra 1 laa? 

'barber' 

sabbaak 

'plumber' 


Many measures have variants which are deteirmined by general phono¬ 
logical rules; in other words, a measure is a class of patterns. For 
example, the following patterns belong to the same measure since they 




EGVPTJAM ARABIC 


127 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


designate the same grammatical meanings ( passivity, etc. ) and since 
the structural differences which distinguish one from the other are 
predictable in terms of phonological changes in the root : 

itFafaL ( from soxmd roots ) 

itFa?? ( from doubled roots ) 

itFaaL ( from hollow roots ) 

itFa?a ( from defective roots ) 

The "basic" shape ( i.e., the shape which stands for the class as 
a whole ) is the one which can yield the other shapes through the 
simplest and most general rules possible; in the case of triliteral 
verbs, the basic shapes are those which have sound roots ( q-v. ). It is 
for this reason that itFa?aL stands for the class which includes 
itFa?aL , itFa?? , itFaaL , and itFa^a ; it follows that ( unless further 
specification is necessary ) itxaram , itTadd , itbaa? and itrama are 
said to be of the measure itFa?aL. 


*** ★** ★** 

MEASURES : JMTUmONAL REALITY OF 

That the measure — apart from the root — is a psychological as 
well as a structural reality can be ascertained from two facts : 
the native's cibility to coin new words by combining a familiar root 
with a familiar measure, and the native's ability to understand 
unfamiliar words which have familiar roots and familiar measures. 

Knowledge of the root-and-measure system of Arcibic makes it 
possible for students to guess with some degree of accuracy the 
meaning of unfamiliar words. Such knowledge may also prove useful 
in memorizing and remembering vocabulary items : the student 
may find it helpful to group together words with the same root or 
words with the same measure, and to study the entire list as sets 
at regular intervals. On the other hand, one should exercise 
caution in forecasting unfamiliar words by combining familiar 



EGyPHAW ARABIC 


128 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


roots with familiar meeisures : such cm atten^t may result in non¬ 
existent forms because no one root is capable of combining with 
every measure, and no measure cam cosdsine with every root. 

*** *** *** 


MIP VOWEL 

A vowel which is produced with the tongue arched at a mid-point 
in the mouth. EA [ I ] is a mid-vowel as in /dill/ — [ dlM ] 
'shade'. 


*** *** *** 


MINIMAL PAIR 

( See : Phoneme ) 


ititit ititit ititit 


MOVALS 


A modal { or modal auxiliary ) is a word that indicates the speaker's 
mood or psychological attitude toward the reality or truth value of the 
action or state denoted by the main verb with which it is used. Modals 
are usually followed by a bcure ( subjunctive ) form, but certain modals 
{ e.g., laazim , gaayiz ) can be followed by a perfect verb. The perfect 
verb denotes a complete event while the subjunctive does not. 


laazim aktib gawaab 
iaazim mill 
labudd nimli 
yimkin asaafir masr 
gaayiz yiigi bukra 


'I must write a letter.' 
'He must have left.' 

'We must leave.' 

'I may go to Egypt.' 

'He may come tommorow.' 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


129 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Either the modal or the main verb in a sentence can be negated. 

Note the difference in meaning in the following sentences : 

yimkin maktibi gawaab 'Maybe I won't write a letter.' 

mayimkin^ aktib gawaab 'I can't write a letter.' 


Many modals are either active or 
are nouns. The following is a lis- 

(a) Active participles : 

9aawiz (-a, -iin) 
naawi (-a, -iin) 
gaayiz 
laazim 

?aaTid (-a, -iin) 

?arnmaaI (-a -iin) 

Note that gaayiz and laazim have t 
respectively. 


passive participles, though some 
. of the most common EA modals. 

'want to ...' 

'intending to ...' 

'it is possible that ...' 

'it is necessary that ...' 

'continuing to ... ' 

'continuing to ... ' 

le variant forms yiquuz and yiIzam 


(b) Passive participles : 

mamnuu? 

masmuuFi 

mustaTidd (-a, -iin) 
mafruud 

misammim (-a, -iin) 
mumkin 

(c) Nouns: 

nifs- + pro. suf. 
?asd- + pro. suf. 
zamaan- + pro. suf. 
tann- + pro. suf. 

(d) Others : 

yareet- + pro, suf. 
yadoob- + pro. suf. 


' it is forbidden to ...' 
' it is permitted to ...' 
' is ready to ...' 

' it is supposed that ... 
' is determined to ...' 
'may ... ' 

' feel like ...' 

' mean to ... ' 

'must have ...' 

'continuing to .. . ' 


(optional)'wish ...' 

'must have ... 


EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


130 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


tabudd 
rubbama 
in§aI la 
ya 11 a 

iyyaa- + pro. suf. 


'must ...' 

'may ...' 

' hope ...' 

'let's ...' 

'better not .. .' 


Notes : 

1. Of the models in categories (a) and (b) , some are impersonal and 
therefore invariable in form, and others are personal and, as 
indicated, must agree in gender and number with the subject of 
the main verb. 

nawya tisaafir bukra 'She intends to leave tomorrow.' 

2. Of the models in categories (c) and (d) , some, as indicated, 
take a following noun or pornoun suffix which agrees with the 
subject of the main verb, yareet can optionally take a pronoun 
suffix. 

nifsi aaku1 tiffaah 'I feel like eating an apple.' 


•kitie *★* 


MODIFIER 


A word used to modify, describe, limit or qualify the meaning of a 
noun, verb or adjective. In Egyptian Arabic this class of modifiers 
consists of (a) adjectives ( including participles used as adjectives 
and (b) adverbs. Examples : 


(a) wa1 ad kibi ir 
bint kbiira 
awlaad kubaar 
beet maftuuh 


'a big boy' 

'a big girl' 
'big boys' 

'an open house' 


Notice number/gender agreement 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


131 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Note that participles used as adjectives (q.v.) are derived from verbs 
whereas the majority of adjectives are not. Many adjectives have the 
form FvTiiL, e.g.. 


kibi ir 
I at i i f 
laz i i z 


■big' 

'nice' 
'delicious' 


(b) Adverbs modify adjectives or verbs. 

giri bsurTa 'he ran fast' 

iI bint nabiiha ?awi 'the girl is very smart' 


★ ** icitic *★* 


MORPHEME 


The minimal meaningful unit of speech in any language; it may be 
a word or part of a word, e.g., Egyptian Arabic Ratab 'to write' has 
one morpheme, katabt 'I wrote' has two and makatabt iS 'I did not write' 
has three. Notice that /ma- —S/, the negative morpheme, is a 
Discontinuous Morpheme . Also note that / - / is referred to as a 
Morpheme Boundary . 


★** *** *** 


MORPHOPHONEME 

A variant of a morpheme (q.v.). E.g., English /-s ~ -z ~ ~\z/ as in 

"cats", "dogs" and "kisses", respectively, are all morphophonemic 
variants ( or allomorphs, q.v. ) of the noun plural morpheme. Their 
form is governed by the phonetic environment. In EA, /wi/ and /w-/ 
are morphophonemic variants of the conjunction "and", /wi/ is con¬ 
ditioned by a preceding consonant and /w-/ is conditioned by a pre¬ 
ceding vowel. 


"kitif 


•kick 


■kkit 




EG/PTIAN ARABIC 


133 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- W - 


NASAL 


Refers to consonants produced with the uvula lowered, allowing the 
air to escape through the nose, so that the nasal cavity acts as a 
resonator : /m, n/. 


*★* *★* *** 


NASAL CAl/iry 

One of the cavaties that serve as a resonator in speech. 

*** *★* 

NEGATION : ma-, ma- _ AND mis ~ muS 

The forms ma-, ma -•.--i and mii ~ mui are used to negate EA expressions 
they are considered variants of the same unit since the choice 
between them is almost completely determined by the environment. 

1. The form ma- 

The contexts where ma- occurs signal en^ihasis ( emphatic negation, 
threat, or strong wish ) . The emphasis in question is not 
signalled by ma- alone : there is always some co-occurrent 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


134 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


constituent which expresses emphasis. Specifically, ma- is 
used in the following environments : 

(a) Prefixed to a verb ( perfect or imperfect ) which follows 
?umr 'ever' or an oath particle : 


Tumri ma-luftu sakraan. 
Tumrukum ma-Fiat it?add imu. 
bisarafi ma-ruFit. 

wa}laahi ma-abibbaha. 


'I never saw him drunk. ' 

'You (p) will never advance.' 

' I swear ( by my honor ) that I 
did not go.' 

'I swear ( by God ) that I don't 
love her.' 


(b) Prefixed to a verb ( perfect or imperfect ) after the form 
yareet 'I wish, would that, I hope' : 

yareetu ma-?irif. 'I wish he had not known.' 

yareet iI Ii Basal ma-Basal . 'I wish what took place had not 

happened.' 

yaritni ma-baBibbaha . 'I wish I were not in love with 

her. ' 

yareetu ma-yiigi. 'I hope he does not come.' 

(c) Prefixed to a subjunctive verb after the expression ya rabb 
'I hope' : 

ya rabb ma-yiigi. 'I hope he will not come.' 

ya rabb ma-tsuufu wiBil 'I hope you will never encounter 

abadan. any evil.' 

Notice that the imperfect after ya rabb , unlike the imperfect 
after yareet , may not take an aspect prefix. 

(d) Prefixed to a perfect verb when the context is a C(. 'ictitionai 
sentence expressing a threat : 

makuns mdiir iImaktab da 'I am not the director of this 
law ma-taradtak. office if I don't fire you !' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


135 


RETERENCE GRAMMAR 


(e) Prerixea to a perfect vert after one of tne forms Vann- and 
inSaI I a ~ ^aI I a which denote annoyance and indifference : 

Vannak ma-kalt. 'I don't give a damn if you don't 

eat 1' 

i nia [ la/la I [a ma- 'To hell with saving money I' 

Fiaww i Ina. 


2 . 


The form ma- ...-I 

The form ma- _-S is used in three environments excluding the 

contexts for ma-. 

(a) Affixed to all verb forms except those which have the prefix 
Ba- : 


ma-katab-i 
ma-byakuI-s 
ma-yi?raf-S yruuB 
ma-t itka 1 i im-§ 


'he did not write' 

'he does not eat' 

'He does not know how to go.' 
'Don't talk !' 


(b) Affixed to an inverted predicate consisting of (i) fii 'there 
is/are' or (ii) a preposition and a pronominal suffix : 


ma-fii-S Badd hina. 
ma-Vandukum-^ fluus ? 
ma-VaIik-S zanb . 
ma-lik-l dahr. 


'There is no one here.' 

'Don't you (p) have any money ?' 
'You (ms) are not to blame.' 

'You (ms) have no one to back 
you up.' 


(c) Affixed to a pronoun when the whole sentence — not the pro¬ 
noun alone — is negated. The pronoun in question is usually 
one which functions as subject : 

ma-ntaa-S fahimni. 'You (ms) don't understand me.' 

Notice, however, that ma- —-s is not used to negate the 
pronoun alone ( i.e., apart from the rest of the sentence ) : 

Tali : mi in illi kasar 'Ali ; Who broke the glass ?' 
iIkubbaaya ? 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


136 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


suzaan : mil ana I Ii 
kasartaha. 


'Susan : I am not the one who 
broke it.' 


Notes 

1. The suffix ^ ( which constitutes the second part of 
ma- ...-I ) occurs after all other suffixes : 

ma-katab-haa-s 'he did not write it (f)' 

ma-katab-ha-I-ak-l 'he did not write it (f) for you' 

ma-ba?attu-hum-l u-hum-l 'I did not send them to them' 

2. Provided it is preceded by a consonant, the suffix 

( which constitutes the second part of ma- ... -I ) may be 
replaced by -si in sentence final position : 

Tali margiTl or 'Ali did not return.' 

?a1i margiTsi. 

The optional occurrence of -si in sentence-final position 
after a consonant may be the result of a tendency to general¬ 
ize : in sentence medial position, -cl is replaced by 
-cl‘ when the next word begins with a consonant : 

/makatabi/ 'he did not write' 

/makatabi' ktaab/ 'he did not write a book' 

Less frequently, sentence final ^ is replaced by -Ii after 
a long vowel : 

maluftahaal. or 'I did not see her.' 

masuftahaali. 

maraFiuul. o£ 'They did not go.' 

marabuuli. 

The optional occurrence of -Ii in sentence-final position 
after a long vowel may be the result of a tendency to gener¬ 
alize. In sentence-medial position, a long vowel rarely 
occurs in a closed syllable. For that reason most speakers 
replace -wl by -vl before a word which begins with a 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


137 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


consonant, and some replace -W^ by -W^! in the same 
position; it is usually the latter group of speakers who 
use -W§i in sentence-final position. 

The validity of the above explanation is supported by the 
fact that a sentence-final is not replaced by -I i after 
a short vowel; thus the form makatabtili does not occur as 
an alternative to sentence-final makatabtiS . 

3. The form mis ~ muS 

The form miS ~ mu§ is used (a) before bi- as an alternative to 

the use of ma- _-I , and (b) in all environments other than 

those for ma- and ma- _ , including rhetorical questions and 

exhortations. 


mi5 baluufu yoom iIBadd o£ 
ma-baSufuu-s yoom ilfSadd. 
illuya l?arabiyya mis sa?ba 
fahmi mis ustaaz. 
issabab miS maTruf- 
tanfiiz awamru mil mumkin. 

mil FiaruuFi masr issanaadi. 
illaxs iili kunt a?sudu mil 
i nta. 

iggaraayid mis filmaktab. 

i 1ba?? mil TaIeek. 
i Ifuluus mis landi. 
mis hazzartak ? 
mi I ti?uum taku1iak 
Iu?ma ? 


'I do not see him on Sunday.' 

'The Arabic language is not difficult. 
'Fahmi is not a professor.' 

'The reason is not known.' 

'Carrying out his orders is not 
possible.' 

' I will not go to Egypt this year.' 
'The person to whom I was referring 
is not you.' 

'The newspapers are not in the 
office.' 

'The fault is not yours.' 

'The money is not with me.' 

'Haven't I warned you ?' (rhetorical) 

'Won't you get up and eat a bite ?' 
(exhortation) 


*** 







EGVPTTAM ARABIC 


138 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


NEGATION : NEGATING A VERBAL NOUN 


Two forms occur as negators of verbal nouns : Tadam and balaa^ ; 
of these, the more frequent is Tadam . The forms in question are not 
interchangeable since they signal different meanings. 

1. Tadam negates the existence of what the verbal noun designates. 
Translatable by non- , un-, in-, dis- , lack of , etc., the word 
Tadam is placed before the verbal noun to be negated. 


ana muta?akkid min Tadam 
wuguud iIRayaat 
fiImarriix. 

muSkilitna hiyya Tadam 
littifaa? Ta Imabaadi? 
i1?asasiyya . 

mis Tagibni Tadam ihtimaamak 
bidruusak. 


'I am certain of the non-exist' 
ence of life on Mars.' 

'Our problem is disagreement 
on the basic principles.' 

'I do not like your lack of 
interest in your studies.' 


2. The form baIaal expresses a request to refrain or desist from 
the action denoted by the following verbal noun; thus baIaa§ 
aki means 'Stop eating'. Notice that in this context the 
verbal noun is usually, though not always, indefinite. ( See : 
Negation : The Form baIaa§ ) 

**★ *** *** 


NEGATION : NEGATING A VERBAL SEQUENCE 

In EA, a verbal sequence may consist of as many as six verbs 
( beginning with a form of kaan and ending with the main verb ) : 

kaan yiRibb yibtidi yruuR 'He would have liked to start 

yitTallim yitmallaq going to learn how to flatter 

innaas. people.' 

Any verb in the sequence may be negated : thus one may say makans 
yhibb ... 'He would not have liked ...', kaan mayRibbiS ... 'He would 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


139 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


have not liked kaan yiRibb mayibtidiil ... 'He would have liked 

not to start .. .', etc. 

As the English translation indicates, negating different verbs in the 
sequence does not result in synonymous expressions. Most situations 
call for negation of only the first verb in the sequence. 

**★ irieie *** 


NEGATION : NEGATING CONVJTWNAL SENTENCES 


The constituents of a conditional sentence are negated in accordance 
with the general rules of negation. The following are examples : 


i za CaIi raah haz?a1. 
iza Tali maraFiS hazTal. 
iza Tali raah mi§ FazTal. 
iza Tali maraFiS mi2 hazTal. 


'If Ali goes, I will be upset.' 

'If Ali does not go, I will be upset. ' 
'If Ali goes, I will not be upset.' 

'If Ali does not go, I will not be 
upset.' 


Some conditional sentences are derived by adding a form of the perfect 
verb kaan to one or more constituents; negation of that form may be 
substituted for negation in the source constituent; thus the following 
pairs are equivalent : 


iza kaan Tali marahs_ 

iza makan^ Tali raafi ... 


'if Ali has not gone' 


law kaan TaIi mi 2 tiI miiz ... 'if Ali were not a student' 

law makan^ Tali tilmiiz... 


law rigTu, kaan maraBS... 'If they had returned he would 

law rigTu, makan§ raaft... not have gone.' 


*★* 




*** 



EGVrnAW ARABIC 


140 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


NEGATION : NEGATING THE SEQUENCE MODAL + VERS 

In a sequence consisting of a modal and a following verb, it is usually 
possible to negate either the modal or the verb. Thus labudd yruufi 
'he must go' may yield mij labudd vruufi 'it is not necessary for him to 
go' or labudd mayruftS 'it is necessary for him not to go; he must not go* 

( notice that the two negative expressions are not identical in meaning ). 
There are, however, some modals which cannot be negated; the main ones 
are inSaj ja 'i hope *, iyyaak *had better not ( threat )*, and rubbama 
'mi^t'. 

**« **« 

NEGATION : THE FORM balaaS 

1. If followed by a verbal noun or a subjunctive form, ba laa§ is an 
instruction to refrain or desist from an action : 

balaal zi?il?. 'Stop shouting !' 

balaaS tiruufi innaharda. 'Don't go today !' 

Notice that in this context the verbal noun is usually, though not 
necessarily, indefinite. 

2. When used as an exclamatory sentence, balaaS indicates compliance 
with a refusal : 

Tali; laazim tigiib ilkutub. 'Ali: You must bring the books.' 

fariid; miS gayibha. 'Farid: I won't bring them.' 

Tali: balaaS. 'Ali: Fine, don't !' 

3. Elsewhere, balaai is an instruction to exclude what follows : 

i?ra gar idt il?ahraam laakin 'Read the newspaper Al-Ahram , but 
balaaS garidt il?axbaar. forget about the newspaper Al- 

Akhbax .' 

mistaktar innu dabafifia wSirib 'Do you find it too much to believe 
min dammaha ? balaaS iirib that he cut her throat and drank 




EGypTIAN ARABIC 


141 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


min dammaha. tistaktar 
i nnu dabafiBa ? 


her blood ? Well, forget about 
drinking her blood. Do you find 
it too much to beleive that he 
cut her throat ? ’ 


*** *** *** 


NEGATION : THE FORM wala 

( See : Conjunctions ) 


★★★ ★★★ 


NEGATIVE IMPERATIVE 

( See : Imperative : Negative ) 

*** *** 


NEGATIVE PARTICLES 


( See : Negation : ma-, ma- ..., mis ~ mus ) 


■kieif *** *** 


NISBA AV3ECTIVES 


In English, adjectives are often formed by the addition of certain 
affixes to nouns ( a process which sometimes requires a change in the 
noun ) : 

Noun Adj ective 

America American 

Rome Roman 

Spain Spanish 

face facial 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


142 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


In EA, an adjective may be formed by adding the suffix ^ noun : 

Noun Adjective 

masr 'Egypt' masri 'Egyptian' 

mawdi? 'place' mawdiTi 'local' 

Adjectives derived in this manner are called " nisba adjectives" or 
"relative adjectives" because they show relationships. The termination 
-V or -(Vy)V is deleted before suffixing /-i/. Examples : 

madrasa ++ -i —madras i 'scholastic' 

baijiika + -i —4 baijiiki 'Belgian' 

turkiya + -i —> turki 'Turkish' 

A noun which invariably occurs with the definite article loses that 
article when the nisba suffix is added : 

ilyabaan + -i —yabaani 'Japanese' 

il?urdun + -i —urduni 'Jordanian' 

The definite article may, of course, be added to yabaani or urduni if 
the modified noun is definite; the fact being stressed is that 
yabaani and urduni are possible while yabaan and urdun are not. 

Upon receiving the nisba suffix, a handful of nouns ( mostly defect¬ 
ive ) undergo changes which cannot be predicted by the above rules; 
for example, Sana 'year' becomes sanawi 'annual', nabi 'prophet' becomes 
nabawi 'prophetic', and asya 'Asia' becomes asyawi 'Asian'. The nisba 
adjectives corresponding to such nouns should be learned as items. 

The feminine singular form of the nisba adjective is obtained by 
adding -yya to the masculine singular form; the plural form, by adding 
-yyiin . : 

Masculine Singular Feminine Singular Plural 
masri 'Egyptian' masriyya masriyyiin 

Notice, however, that some nisba adjectives have broken plurals, e.g., 
atraak "Turkish (p)', ingiIiiz 'British (p)'. 

In a sequence of adjectives, a nisba adjective must come first : 

'a red English tie' 


karafatta ingiliizi hamra 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


143 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


For contexts where nisba adjectives designate color, type of product, 
or social status, see "Adjective : Attributive Construction". 

A nisba adjective can be used as a noun, as can other adjectives, e.g. 

iImasri 'the Egyptian ( man )' 

suuriyya 'a Syrian ( woman )' 

*** *** *** 


NOUINALUATION : VEFINITJON 


Nominalization is the use of a sentence to fill a slot which is 
typically filled by a noun. For example, the object slot in simiTt 
i Ixabar 'I heard the news' is typically filled by a noun; however. 


the sentence ?aIi riqi? 'Ali has 
same slot : 

simiinn Tali rigi?. 

More examples are given below, 
nominal slot is underlined : 

?aa I inn fatFii kaslaan . 
Tirift inn far i ida 
raafiit masr . 
iftakaru inn iqgam^a 


syayyara . 

f i kri t i nnak t i ruufi 



returned' may be used to fill the 

'I heard that Ali has returned.' 
In each case, the filler of the 

'He said that Fathi is lazy.' 

'1 learned that Farida went to 
Egypt.' 

'They thought that the university 
was small.' 

'The idea of your going to France 
is not a good one.' 


In the last example, the nominalized sentence is the second term of 
a noun construct, which explains the final -it of fikrit . 

Certain nominalized expressions must be introduced by a nominalizer 
( in the above examples, the nominalizer is inn ), others may or may 
not be introduced by a nominalizer, and still others are never intro¬ 
duced by a nominalizer ( see : "Nominalizers" and "Nominalization 
Without Nominalizers" ). 




EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


144 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


A nominalized expression may occur in various nominal slots; it may, 
for example, function as subject of the sentence, object of a verb, 
object of a preposition, or second term of a noun construct : 

mil safiiifi inn almanya 'It is not true that Germany 

8taI I it masr . occupied Egypt.' 

simiTt innak itra??eet . 'I heard that you have been promoted 

it?aggibt min innak marufitiI . 'I was surprised that you did not go 
issinaa?a lyabaniyya 'Japanese industry has progressed 

t?addimit lidaragit inn to the extent that Japan exports 

iIyabaan bitsaddar cars.' 

iI?arabiyyaat . 

Notice that a nominalized subject is often transposed to the position 
which follows the predicate. This transposition is the normVhen the 
predicate is short and verbless, it is frequent when the predicate is a 
verb or a short expression containing a verb, and it is infrequent 
otherwise. 


inn almanya btallit masr 
mil saRiiR. 

> mil saRiiR inn almanya 
RtaI I it masr. 


'That Germany occupied Egypt is 
not true.' 

'It is not true that Germany 
occupied Egypt.' 


inn basma maxallasiti 
illuyI narfizni. 

> narfizni inn basma 

maxallasiti illuyl. 


'That Basma did not finish the 
work upset me.' 

'It upset me that Basma did not 
finish the work.' 


inn ilRurriyya tRaddidit 'That freedom was restricted 

asnaa? ilRarb ilTalamiyya during World War I created a 

l?uula sabbib IiImasriyyiin large number of problems for 
malaakiI kit lira giddan. the Egyptians.' 

For the purpose of agreement, a nominalized s\ibject is considered 
third-person masculine singular : 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


145 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


za?Taini innak latamtaha 'It upset me that you insulted her.' 
safiiifi inn masr it?addimit. 'It is true that Egypt has pro¬ 
gressed. ' 

ititit itiiit Ititii 

NOmNALlZATlON WITHOUT NOMIWALIZERS : mPERATTVES 

Imperative sentences are embedded: in nominal slots without the use of 
a nominalizer after verbs of saying. An imperative verb form in the 
sentence to be embedded may rerain unchanged or it may be replaced by 
the stabjunctive form. The following utterances result from embedding 
the sentence ruuFi iddukkaan 'Go to the shop' in the nominal slots fol¬ 
lowing ?u11iIu 'I said to him; I told him', ?u11iI ha 'i said to her; I 
told her', etc. 

1. Tultilu ruuft iddukkaan. '1 said to him. Go to the shop.' 

?uItiI ha. ruufii ddukkaan. 'I said to her. Go to the shop.' 

?ultilhum ruufiu ddukkaan. 'I said to them. Go to the shop.' 
?ultilak ruufi iddukkaan. 'I said to you (ms). Go to the shop.' 

?ultilik ruufii ddukkaan. 'I said to you (fs), Go to the shop.' 

?ultilkum ruufiu ddukkaan. '1 said to you (p), Go to the shop.' 

?alli ruufi iddukkaan. 'He said to m® (m) , Go to the shop.' 

?alli ruufii ddukkaan. 'He said to me (f), Go to the shop.' 

?allina ruufiu ddukkaan. 'He said to us. Go to the shop.' 

'I told him to go to the shop.' 

'I told her to go to the shop.' 

'I told them to go to the shop.' 

'I told you (ms) to go to the shop.' 

'I told you (fs) to go to the shop.' 

'I told you (p) to go to the shop.' 

'He told ime to go to the shop. ' 

'He told us to go to the shop.' 


2. ?ultilu yruufi iddukkaan, 
?ultiiha truufi iddukkaan. 
?ultilhum yuruufiu ddukkaan. 
Tultilak turuufi iddukkaan. 
?u11i1ik turuufii ddukkaan. 
?u11i1kum turuufiu ddukkaan. 
?alli aruufi iddukkaan. 
?allina nruufi iddukkaan. 




^GVVnAN ARABIC 


X46 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Notice that in group 2 the subjunctive form agrees with its subject 
in number, gender and person, whereas in group 1 the embedded sentences 
are direct discourse and do not affect the syntax of the sentence. 

Negative iiig>erative sentences contain { or consist of ) negated verb 
forms such as matrufil 'do not go (ms) matrufii i§ 'do not go (fs) ', and 
matrufiuuS 'do not go (p)'. Such forms may (1) be embedded in a nominal 
slot without being changed; they may also (2) be changed to agree with a 
subject of the third or the first person ; 

1. ?ul'tilu matrufiS iddukkaan. 'I said to him. Do not go to the shop.' 

?ultnha matrufii i§ iddukkaan. 'I said to her. Do not go to the shop.' 
?ultilhum matrufiuuS iddukkaan. 'I said to them. Do not go to the shop.’ 
Vultilak matrufil iddukkaan. 'I said to you (ms). Do not go to the shop 

?ultilik matrufiiiI iddukkaan. 'I said to you (fs), Do not go to the shop 

?ultilkum matrufiuul iddukkaan. 'I said to you (p), Do not go to the shop. 
?alli matrufii iddukkaan. 'He said to me (m), Do not go to the shop. 

?alli matrufiiil iddukkaan. 'He said to me (f), Do not go to the shop. 

?allina matrufiuul iddukkaan, 'He said to us. Do not go to the shop.' 


2 . 


?ultilu mayrufil iddukkaan. 'I told him not to go to the shop.' 

?ultilha matrufii iddukkaan. 'I told her not to go to the shop.' 

?ultilhum mayrufiuul iddukkaan.'l told them not to go to the shop.' 
?ultilak matrufii iddukkaan. 'I told you (ms) not to go to the shop.' 

?ultilik matrufiiil iddukkaan. 'I told you (fs) not to go to the shop.' 

?ultilkum matrufiuul iddukkaan.'I told you (p) not to go to the shop.' 
?alli marufil iddukkaan. 'He told me not to go to the shop.' 

?allina manrufil iddukkaan. 'He told us not to go to the shop.' 


In both cases, the difference between sentences of Group 1 and those 
of Group 2 is the difference between direct and indirect quotes. 


*«* *** *** 


NOMINALIZATJON WITHOUT NOMINALIZERS : QUESTIONS 

Questions are usually embedded in nominal slots without the use of a 
nominalizer. The first sentence below results from embedding the question 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


147 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


riqi? Ieeh ? 'Why did he return ?' in the subject slot; the second sen¬ 
tence results from embedding the same question in the object slot : 

riqi? Ieeh mil mu hi mm. 'Why he returned is not important.' 
ma Trail rigi? Ieeh . 'I do not know why he returned.' 

A question which is embedded in a nominal slot usually implies a noun; 
e.g., in the above sentences riqiT 1eeh implies issabab 'the reason'. 
There may be a relationship between this fact and the fact that questions 
are usually embedded in nominal slots without a nominalizer ( nouns 
are used as fillers of nominal slots with no need for nominalizers ). 

The following sentences provide additional examples : 


mil Taarif raah feen . 
xammin miin bithibbu . 
mas?alit riqiT imta d i 
mat hi mminiil. 

?ulIi Itareet eeh ? 


' I do not know where he went.' 

'Guess who loves him. ' 

'This question of when he returned is 
of no interest to me.' 

'Tell me what ( it is that ) you 
bought.' 


Embedding a yes-or-no question in a nominal slot usually involves the 
addition of the expression walla la? 'or not' at the end of the slot : 


Taawiz aTraf inta ruht 'I want to know whether you went or 
walla la?. not.' 


Besides, one of the expressions in kaan and iza kaan ( both translatable 
by 'whether' ) may be added at the beginning of the slot; in this context, 
kaan agrees with its subject in number, gender, and person : 


Taawiz aTraf (iza kaan) 
TaIi raah walla la? 

Taawiz aTraf (in kaanit) 
fariida raahit walla 
la?. 

Taawiz aTraf (iza kuntu) 
intu rufitu walla la?. 


'I want to know whether Ali went 
or not.' 

' I want to know whether Farida went 
or not.' 

'I want to know whether you (p) 
went or not.' 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


148 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


When an alternative question is embedded in. a nominal slot, one of the 
ejgsressions in kaan and iza kaan may be added at the beginning of the 
slot: in this context, kaan agrees with its siibject in number, gender, 
and person : 


ma?raf§ (iza kaan) Taawiz 
yidris hina walla 
f faransa. 

ma?raf§ (in kaanit) Tawza 
tidris hina walla 
ffaransa. 


'I do not know whether he wants 
to study here or in France.' 

' I do not know whether she 
wants to study here or in 
France.' 


*** *** 


NOMINALIZEV SENTENCES : POSSIBILITY OF REPLACING CERTAIN CONSTITUENTS BY A 
NOUN 


A nominalizer plus the predicate of the nominalized expression may 
usually be replaced by a noun which then enters into construct with 
the subject. This transformation is restricted to instances where the 
predicate in question is one of the following : 

1. A verb or a form which is derived from a verb. Replacement here 
is by a verbal noun : 


?areet xabar ?an inn 
i Iwazi i r itqawwiz . 

?areet xabar Tan qawaaz 
i 1 wa z i i r. 


' I read an item in the news about 
the fact that the (cabinet) 
minister got married.' 

'1 read an item in the news about 
the marriage of the (cabinet) 
minister.' 


koonak maihuur 'Your being famous will harm you. 

fiaydurrak. 

^uhritak Fiatdurrak 


Your .fame will harm you.' 



EGyPTIAN ARABIC 


149 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


?abiltu bafd ma r iqi? . 'I met him after he returned.' 

?abiltu baTb rquu?u . 'I met him after his return.' 


2. A noun or an adjective which is not derived from a verb but which 
yields a noun of quality. Replacement here is by the noun of 
quality : 


mafii^ Sakk f- inn Tali 
watani . 

mafiiS Sakk f-w atanivyit 
?al i . 


'There is no question that Ali 
is patriotic.' 

'There is no question in regard to 
Ali's patriotism.' 


suzaan tnuTgaba b- koonu 
raaq i I . 

suzaan mufgaba bi- 
ruquuliyyitu. 


'Susan admires the fact that he 
is manly.' 

'Susan admires his manliness.' 


**★ **★ *** 


MOMWALIZER : inn 


The nominalizer i nn introduces an embedded clause in contexts other 
than those where the nominalizer ma occurs ( see "Nominalizer : ma" ) : 


simiTt inn ndaal itxatabit. 
muhtama1 inn a^raf rigiT. 

matnazilS Idaragit inn- i 
a?miI Tama 1 zayy da. 
it?aggibt min inn- ak 
zaTTaItaha. 


' I heard that Nidal got engaged.' 

'It is possible that Ashraf has 
returned.' 

'I would not stoop to the point 
of doing such a thing.' 

' I was surprised at the fact 
that you upset her.' 


EA contains a set of close-knit expressions each consisting of a verb 
and a closely associated preposition ( or a "phrasal verb" ); e.g., 
daTa Ii- 'to wish well to ( someone )', niziI fi 'to attack ( someone ) 


vigorously', dahha bi- 'to sacrifice ( something )', and katab Tala 




EG/rriAM ARABIC 


150 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


' for God to decree ( something ) on ( someone ) ' . These expressions 
are followed by inn . Note the following alternatives : 

1. The preposition may be deleted . 

2. The sequence Preposition + inn + subject of a subjunctive form 
may be deleted. In most cases, this transformation does not 
apply unless — in the source string — the verb after inn 
expresses a possibility further delineated by the verb form 
which precedes inn . The result of the transformation is a verbal 
phrase, and is therefore restricted by the rules which govern 
auxiliaries ( see "Verb : Auxiliaries" ) . 

The following are examples : 

Tali sammim Tala i nnu yiigi.'i 'Ali was determined to come.' 

Tali sammim innu yiigi. ^ 

Ta1i sammim yiigi. ' 

Tali sammim Tala innina 'Ali was determined to have us 

nzuuru. visit him.' 

Tali sammim innina nzuuru. { 

Tali sammim nzuuru. 


Tali maysuub Tala innu yruuB.j'Ali is forced to go.' 
Tali maysuub innu yruub. v 
Tali maysuub yiruufi. 


Listed below are some common close-knit expressions which are formed 
after the pattern Verb + Preposition and which designate subjunctive 
meanings : 


it zaa hir bi- 
nasaFi bi- 
ridi bi- 
waTad bi- 
samaFi bi- 
asarr bi- 


'to feign ( something )' 

' to advise ( someone ) to' 

'to be satisfied with' 

'to promise ( something to someone )' 
'to allow ( something )' 

'to insist on' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


151 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


fakkar fi 

'to 

it?akkid min 

'to 

mana? min 

'to 

xaaf min 

'to 

aryam Cal a 

'to 

ittafa? Cala 

'to 

waafi? Cal a 

'to 

wassa Cal a 

'to 

yasab Cal a 

'to 


For the deletion of inn after other 

*** leieic 


reflect on' 

be certain of' 

prevent ( someone ) from' 

be afraid of 

compel (someone) to do (something) 
agree on' 
agree to' 

bequeath (something) to (someone)' 
force (someone) to do (something)' 

verbs, see Verb : Auxiliaries . 


NOMINALJZER : koon 


The nominalizer koon is used interchangeably with inn in many but 
not in all contexts : 

1. koon is frequently substituted for inn when the nominalized 
expression is verbless : 

ahamm Fiaaga fsalBu nnu 'The most important thing in his 
zaabit or ahamm haaga favor is the fact that he is an 
fsalFiu koonu zaabit. officer.' 

2. koon is occasionally substituted for i nn when the nominalized 
expression contains a verb denoting a fact ( rather than a 
possibility ) : 

i nnu biyyiib kitilr mi^ 'The fact that he is often absent 
fi salRu or koonu is not in his favor.' 

biyyiib kitiir mis fi 
sa i Ru . 

3. koon is not substituted for inn when the nominalized expression 


indicates a possibility rather than a fact : 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


152 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


yaguuz inn hyaam tirga? 'Hiyam may rettirn tomorrow.' 
bukra. 

but not *yaguuz koon hiyaam tirga? 
bu kra. 


•kic-k *** *** 


NOMINALIZER : ma 

Like inn , ma introduces an embedded clause. ma_ occurs after certain 
prepositions and nouns, and i nn occurs elsewhere. 

The following differences must be noted : 

1. inn is usually followed by a noun or a pronoun functioning as 
subject. The same is true of the nominalizer ma ; the difference 
is that ma_ may be followed immediately by a verb form. 

simiTI: inn TeeSa 'I heard that Aisha got married.' 

tgawwizit. 

simi^t innaha 'I heard that she got married.' 

tgawwizit. 

rigiTt ba?d ma 'I returned after Adnan did.' 

Tadnaan rigi?. 

rigiTt ba?d ma huwwa 'I returned after he did.' 

rigi?. 

rigiTt ba?d ma rigi?. 'I returned after he did.' 

2. A pronoun which follows inn is a suffix; one which follows ma^ 
is independent ; 

yaguuz innaha rigTit. 'Perhaps she has returned.' 

rigi?t baTd ma hiyya 'I returned after she did.' 

rigTit. 

3. In most { though not all ) cases, an iit^Jerfect verb form which 
follows ma is bare ( = subjunctive ) : 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


153 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


simiTt innu 
bu kra. 
simi^t innu 
yoom. 

bawsal ?abl 
bawsal ?abl 


bayiigi 

by i i g i kuI 1 

ma yiwsal . 
ma yiwsal . 


'I heard that he will come tomorrow.' 

'I heard that he comes every day.' 

' I will arrive before he does.' 

'I usually arrive before he does.' 


Generally speaking, the forms which precede the nominalizer ma^ are 
prepositions or nouns. Listed below are the most common combinations 
of a preposition or noun and ma_. Notice that, in the majority of 
instances, each expression corresponds to an English conjunction. 

1. ba?d ma 'after' : A verb which follows this expression may be 
perfect or imperfect. 

rigiTt ba?d ma rigi?. 'I returned after he did.' 

rigiTt ba?d ma rigi? Tali. 'I returned after Ali did.' 

rigiTt baTd Tali ma rigiT. 'I returned after Ali did.' 


FiargaT baTd ma yirgaT. 
BargaT baTd ma yirgaT Tali. 
BargaT baTd Tali ma yirgaT. 


'I will return after he does.' 
'I will return after Ali does.' 
'I will return after Ali does.' 


2. Tab I ma 'before' : A verb which follows Tab I ma is usually an 

imperfect form; the temporal designation of that verb is the same 
as that of the verb which precedes ma^. 


kalIimtu Tab I ma rgaT. 
bastaBamma Tab I ma naam. 
Bayiktib ilmaqaala Tab I 
ma yruuB faransa. 

3. 1 i Badd ma 'iintil' : 

sakan fi bitna IBadd ma 
naTal IiTaswaan. 
Bayuskun maTaana IBadd 
ma yunTuI IiTaswaan. 


'I talked to him before I returned 
'I take a bath before I go to bed. 
'He will write the article before 
he goes to France.' 

'He lived in our house until he 
moved to Aswan.' 

'He will live with us until he 


moves to Aswan. 




EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


154 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


4. IiYaayit ma 'until' : This ejqsression is interchangeable with 
I i Fiadd ma . 

5. mi n yser ma 'without' : 

xarag min yeer ma 
y i staFiamma. 


'He went out without taking a 
bath.' 


6. Tand ma 'when' : 

igru ?and ma tismaTu 
ssuffaara. 

7. wa?t ma 'when, the moment that' 

Fia§raFilu Imawduu? wa?t 
ma yirga?. 

8. saaTit ma 'when, the hour that' 

ittisil biyya saaTit ma 
t iwsal . 

9. nahaar ma 'the day that' : 

kunt fiskindiriyya nahaar 
ma tgawwizit. 


'Rian when you hear the whistle.' 


'I will explain the matter to him 
when he returns.' 


'Get in touch with me when you 
arrive.' 


'I was in Alexandria the day she 
got married.' 


10. yoom ma 'the day that' : This expression is usually interchangeable 
with nahaar ma. 


11. sanit ma 'the year that' : 

kunt fsurya sanit ma 'I was in Syria the year that 

tammit ilwiRda been Egypt and Libya united.' 

masr w I ibya. 


12 . 


matrah ma 'the place that, where, anywhere that, wherever' : 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


155 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


la?a Imahfaza matrafi 
ma sabha. 

matrafv ma truufi aruuFi. 


'He found the wallet where he had 
left it.' 

'Wherever you go, I will go.' 


13. makaan ma and maFia I 1 ma : Both expressions are interchangeable 
with matrab ma. 


14. mi?daar ma : 'the degree to which, the extent to which' : 


indahaSt min mi?daar 
ma hiyya gamii!a. 


' I was astounded by how beautiful 
she is ( literally : "by the 
degree to which she is beautiful" ). 


Three more ejqiressions which contain m^, and which are translatable by 
English conjunctions, are : fiima 'while', baynama 'while', and kulI ma 
'whenever'. Of these, the first two are usually followed by a clause 
which contains a form of the perfect verb kaan and (a) an imperfect 


indicative ( with the /bi-/ prefix or 
third ( ku11 ma ) is usually followed 

fiima kunna bnitgaadil, 
innuur ittafa. 

issawra ?aamit baynama 
kaan ra?iis iggumhuriyya 
barra Ibalad. 

kul1 ma yiigi, a?fil ilbaab 
fi wilSu. 

*** *** 


(b) an equational clause. The 

by a bare imperfect (subjunctive) verb 

'While we were arguing, the 
lights went off.' 

'The rebellion took place while the 
president of the republic was out 
of the country.' 

'Whenever he comes, I slam the 
door in his face. ' 

*** 


NOUN 


In Egyptian Arabic (EA), nouns (n) are either masculine (m) or 
feminine (f) in gender. Most feminine nouns end in /-a/, and most 
masculine nouns do not. For other nouns, the sex of the referent 




EGVFTUN ARABIC 


156 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


clearly indicates the graunnatical gender, e.g., /bint/ (f) 'girl'. 
Henceforth, gender need not be indicated when it is clear from the 
form of the noun or the sex of the referent. Indication of gender is 
only needed for such notins as /mabna/ (m) 'building' or /naar/ (f) 
'fire* since gender is not cle 2 u: from their forms. Most nouns inflect 
for the dual and all nouns ( except collectives, q.v. ) inflect for 
plural. 

( See also : Collective Houns; Verbal Nouns; Pliural; Dual Nouns; 

Gender ) 


*** *** *** 


NOUN : BASIC 

A noun that has no relation to any verb or verb stem (q.v.) from 
which it could be derived; e.g., /katab/ 'to write' has /kitaab/ 'book' 
as a derived noun, /mayya/ 'water', on the other hand, is a basic 
noun since there is no verb from which it is derived in EA. 

*** *** 


NOUNS : HUim ANV N0N~HUMAN 

A human noun is one that in its singular form refers to human beings. 

With human plural nouns, adjectives agree in number : /awlaad kubaar/ 
'big boys'; /banaat kubaar/ 'big girls'. However, with non-human 
plural nouns, either plural adjectives or feminine singular adjectives 
may be used : 

/kutub kubaar/ 'big books' 

/kutub kibiira/ 'big books' 

The latter form is sometimes applied even to modify human plural nouns 
by some speakers of EA, e.g., 


/awlaad kutaar/ 
/awlaad kit lira/ 


'many boys' 
'many boys' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


157 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


and /banaat kutaar/ 
/banaat kitiira/ 


'many girls' 
'many girls' 


Human Plurals 

S# 1 : ilbanaat dool tuwaal walla ?usayyariin ? 

'Are these girls tall or short ?' 

S# 2 : iIbanaat dool tuwaal mis ?usayyariin. 

"These girls are tall; not short.' 

Non-Human Plurals 

(a) S# 1 : ilkutub di gdiida walla ?adiima ? 

:'Are these books new or old ?' 

S# 2 : iIkutub di gdiida 

:'These books are new.' 

(b) S# 1 : ilkutub dool gudaad walla ?udaam 

'Are these books new or old ?' 

S# 2 : ilkutub dool gudaad 

'These books are new.' 

Remember that demonstratives and adjectives must agree in number with 
the Human Plural nouns they modify. 

Here, "Non-Human Plurals", e.g., book, table, etc., preferably are 
treated as feminine singular syntactically only . That is to say, they 
are plurals, but in terms of gender and number they take (fs) demonstra 
tives and adjectives. However, it is pjossible to treat them as plurals 
syntactically; that is to say, to use plural demonstratives and adject¬ 
ives as in the variant examples above (b) . 

Demonstratives and adjectives must agree in gender as well as number 
with the singular nouns they modify, whether the noun has a human or 
non-human referent. 






**★ 




EGyPTIAW ARABIC 


158 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


MOUM Of CHARACTER 

A word ( derived in most cases from a verb (q.v.) ) that refers to a 
characteristic of a person. They are formed on the measure (q.v.) 
Fa?TaaL , e.g., 

kizib 'to tell lies' kazzaab 'liar' 

nisi 'to forget' nassaay 'forgetful' 


*** *** *** 


NOUN Of INSTRUMENT 

/muftaaR/ 'key' and /munlaar/ 'saw' are nouns of instrument derived 
from the verbs /fataFi/ 'to open' and /na§ar/ 'to saw' respectively, on 
the measure muF^aaL . other nouns of instrument are /madrab/ 'racket' 
and /mabSara/ 'peeler' derived from /darab/ 'to hit' and /baSar/ 'to 
peel' respectively, on the measure maFTal(-a). 

ieieie *** 


NOUN Of PROFESSION OR OCCUPATION 

A noun derived, usually from a verb, but in some cases from a noun, and 
which denotes a profession or occupation. Most of these are of the 
measure FaSSaaL, e.g. : 


xa baz 

'to bake' 

xabbaaz 

'baker' 

bana 

'to build' 

banna 

'mason' 

(0 

X 

'handwriting' 

xattaat 

' calligrapher' 

Rad i id 

' iron' 

Raddaad 

'blacksmith' 

baab 

'door' 

bawwaab 

'doorman, concierge 


The following nouns of profession are of the measure muFaT'TiLC-a ) 
( an active participle measure ) : 




EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


159 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


darris 'to teach' 
marrad 'to nurse' 
fattil 'to inspect' 


mudarris(-a) 'teacher' 
mumarrid(-2) 'nurse' 
mufattil(-a) 'inspector' 


There are other measures for nouns of profession or occupation, but 
those shown above are among the most common. 


**★ *★* ★** 


NOUN OF PLACE 

/matbax/ 'kitchen' is a noun of place derived from the verb /tabax/ 
'to cook' on the measure maFTaL (m); /maktab/ 'office' is another noun 
of place derived from the verb /katab/ 'to write', /maktaba/ 'library, 
bookstore' is a noun of place derived from the same verb on the measure 
itiaFTaLa (f) . 


*** *** *** 

NOUN REPLACER ma : VIFFERENCE FROM NOMINALJZERS 

While the replacer ma_ implies a noun, nominalizers are semantically 
empty. This fact becomes clear when the following sentences are 
compared. 

1. da aFisan min inn Tali yirga?. 'This is preferable to having Ali 

return.' 

2. fariida agmal mimma (= min ma) 'Farida is prettier than Ali 

?ali yzunn. imagines.' 

In sentence 1 the object of the preposition is ?a I i yirqa ? , and for 
that reason inn ?aIi yirqa? may be replaced by ruquu? Ta ii 'All's return' 
In sentence 2 the object of the preposition is rna_, and for that reason 
ma ?ali yzunn cannot be replaced by zann Ta Ii 'All's imagination' ( in 
other words, Farida is not prettier than All's imagination ; rather, she 
is prettier than what Ali imagines ). 



EGVPTJAhi ARABIC 


160 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


The replacer rna_ should not be confused with the nominalizer ma_ : the 
former implies a noun while the latter is semantically eirpty. Compare 
the following sentences : 

3. rigi?t ba?d ma Tali rigiT 'I returned after Ali did.' 

4. fariIda agmal mimma ( = min 'Farida is prettier than Ali imagines.' 
ma) Tali yzunn. 

In sentence 3 the object of the preposition is Tali rigiT , and for 
that reason ma Ta1i rigiT may be replaced by ruquuT TaIi 'All's return.' 

In sentence 4 the object of the preposition is ma , and for that reason 
ma TaIi yzunn cannot be replaced by zann Tal i 'All's imagination'. 

The replacer ma^ differs from inn and koon in two major respects : 

1. The replacer may occur directly before a verb ( in addition 

to the fact that it may occur before a noun or a pronoun functioning 
as siibject ) ; i nn and koon must occur before a noun or a pronoun 
functioning as a subject.' 

Tama Iu zayy ma ?aalit. 'They did as she said.' 

Tamalu zayy ma zeenab Taalit. 'They did as Zeinab said.' 

Tamalu zayy ma hiyya Taalit. 'They did as she said.' 

iftakart inn Tali min 'I thought that Ali was from 

lubnaan. Lebanon.' 

iftakarf innak min 'I thought you were from Lebanon.' 

lubnaan. 

2. The pronoun which follows the replacer rr^ is independent; the 
pronoun which follows inn and k oon is a suffix. 

iTmil zayy ma nta Taawiz. 'Do as you (ms) wish.' 

zanneet innaha Tayyaana. 'I thought she was sick.' 

*★* ★** *** 

MOLIN REPLACER ^ •• PUNCH01^ 

The replacer ma is substituted for a definite non-htiman noun which 
is modified by a relative clause; this fact becomes clear when one 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


161 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


compares sentences such as the following : 

1. haTmiI aktar min i1haaga III i 'I will do more than the thing he 

yitiubha. requests. 

2. haTmil aktar mimma ( = min ma) 'l will do more than he requires.' 

yitlub or ... mimma yitiubu. 

The transformation which derives sentences like 2 from sentences like 1 
involves : 

(a) Substitution of ma_ for the definite modified noun. 

(b) Deletion of iI Ii . 

(c) Optional deletion, from the modifier, of the pronoun which 
functions as direct object of a verb and which refers to the 
replaced noun. If retained, the pronoun in question must 

be masculine singular since the form ma_ is considered masculine 
singular. 


More 

examples are given below; 

in each case, sentence (a) is the source 

string 

of sentence (b). 


(a) 

da a?gab See? Suftu. 

'This is the strangest thing I have seen 

(b) 

da a?gab ma Suft (u) . 

'This is the strangest thing I have seen 

(a) 

i?mi1 zayy iSSee? i11i 

'Do in accordance with the thing that 


tFiibbu. 

you like. ' 

(b) 

i?mi1 zayy ma tbibb. 

'Do as you like.' 

(a) 

da foo? ilmi?daar i 1 1 i 

'This is more than the amount I 


atsawwaru. 

envisioned.' 

(b) 

da foo? ma kunt 

atsawwar(u). 

'This is more than I envisioned.' 

(a) 

da aktar min ilkimmiyya 

'This is more than the amount I 


1 1 i talabtaha. 

requested.' 

(b) 

da aktar mimma (= min 

'This is more than I requested.' 


ma) talabt(u). 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


162 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


In the foregoing examples, rr)a_ replaces a singular non-human noun 
which is modified by a relative clause; as the following sentences 
show, may also replace a plural non-htman novin which is modified 
by a relative clause : 

da afisan i I fiagaat illi Tandi. 'This is the best of the things 1 have 
da afisan ma Tandi . 'This is the best thing I have ( lit¬ 

erally : "the best of what I have" ) . 

The replacer ma_ occurs most commonly as the object of a preposition, 
the object of a verb, or the second term of a construct phrase; its 
occurrence as the subject of a sentence is restricted to a handful of 
idiomatic expressions such as binh.um ma Sana? i! Fiaddaad 'There is a grea 
deal of aniiiKJsity between them. ' 

★** ** * 


NOUN REPLACER ma : MEANING 


The replacer ma_ is translatable by 'what, the thing(s) that' : 

kul ma tFiibb 'Eat the thing(s) you like.' 

da afisan ma Tandi 'This is the best I have ( literally : 

"the best of the thing(s) I have" ).' 


Although it replaces a noun which is definite in form, ma_ is indef¬ 
inite in meaning : the nouns which it replaces ( i^see? 'the thing', 
i l?aiyaa? 'the things', i I Raaga 'the thing', i I fiaqaat 'the things' ) 
are semantically indefinite in the sense that each designates a class 
of unspecified referents. Compare, for example, the nouns of the first 
column below with the nouns of the second column. 


i§§ee? 'the thing' 

i 1 Fiaaga 'the thing' 
i l?aSyaa? 'the things' 
i IRagaat 'the things' 


ilkitaab 'the book' 
il?alam 'the pencil' 
ilkutub 'the books' 
illa?laam 'the pencils' 


All of the nouns in the list have non-human referents. The difference 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


163 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


is that while each of the nouns on the right denotes a distinct 
object which is clearly differentiated from other non-human referents, 
the corresponding noun on the left denotes any non-human referent; in 
this sense, the nouns on the left are semantically indefinite. 

*** *** *** 


NOUN : SINGULAR COUNT 

( See : Numerals : Singular Count Nouns ) 

*** *** 

NUMERALS : CARVINAL HUNVREVS - INVEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

The forms for the hundreds are listed below. Notice that, with the 
exception of 200, each numeral has two forms : one which ends in -a 
and another which ends in the latter is used before a counted noun, 

and the former is used elsewhere. 


m i yya 

mi it 


'100' 

mi teen 

miteen 


'200' 

tu1tumiyya 

tu1tumiit 


'300' 

rubTumiyya 

rubTumiit 


■400’ 

xumsumiyya 

xumsumiit 


'500' 

suttumiyya 

suttumiit 


'600' 

subTumiyya 

subTumiit 


'700' 

tumnumiyya 

tumnumiit 


'800' 

tusTumiyya 

tusTumiit 


■900' 

The counted noun is singular 

and follows the 

numeral 

miit raagi1 

'100 

men' 


mi it sitt 

'100 

women' 


mi it gineeh 

'100 

pounds 

( money 

miteen kitaab 

'200 

books' 






EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


164 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


xumsumiit beet '500 houses' 

subTumiit faddaan '700 (Egyptian) acres' 

*** *** *** 

NUMERALS : CARVINAL MILLIONS S BILLIONS -- INVEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

The form for 'one million' is m i I yoon and the form for 'one billion' 
is biIyoon , both being singular counted nouns (q.v.). The words 
mi Iyoon and biIyoon are counted as follows : 

1. 'Two million' and 'two billion' are expressed by itneen miIyoon , 
and itneen biiyoon , respectively. 

2. Millions and billions are expressed by phrases in which the long 
forms of 3 - 10 precede one of the singular forms miIyoon and 

biIyoon . 

arba? talaaf 'four thousand' 

arba?a milyoon 'four million' 

arba?a biiyoon 'four billion' 

* ** *★★ 

NUMERALS •• CARVINAL 'ONE' — INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

The cardinal numeral 'one' has two forms : waaFiid (m) and wahda (f) . 
Singularity is usually indicated by the singular form of the noun with 
out use of the numeral ( e.g., kitaab 'a book, one book' ); consequently 
waaFiid and wahda have restricted occurrence. The following are the most 
common contexts where waaFiid and waFida are used : 

1. waaFiid may be used to modify a preceding masculine singular noun, 
and waFida may be used to modify a preceding feminine singular 
noun. Since the noun itself indicates singularity, the effect 
of the numeral is to emphasize — rather than merely to denote 
number. 




EGyPTIAM ARABIC 


165 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


land i ktaab waafiid. 'I have a single book.' 

?andi lanta wa6da. 'I have only one suitcase.' 

2. The forms waafiid and waRda are sometimes used as nouns with the 
meaning 'someone, somebody, a certain person'. In this usage, 
the numeral may also occur in apposition with a following 
singular noun : 

fiih waaRid mistanniik. 'There is someone waiting for you.' 

?abiIt waRda fallaaRa. 'I met a certain peasant woman ( lit¬ 
erally : "a woman who is a peasant" ). 

3. The masculine form waa Rid also occurs in the following contexts : 

(a) Before singular counted nouns (q.v.) which are used in 
ordering food, drinks, etc. 

waaRid 5aay 'one ( cup of ) tea' 

waaRid laRma 'one { serving of ) meat' 

(b) In compound numerals before the forms mii yoo n 'million' and 
biIyoon 'billion' : 

.waaRid milyoon wi tuitumiit aif '1,3000,000' 

waaRid bilyoon xumsumiit milyoon '1,500,600,000' 

wi suttumiit aif 

(c) At the end of a compound numeral : 

miyya wwaaRid '101' 

miyya wwaaRid kitaab '101 books' 

(d) In counting and mathematical calculation : 

waaRid, itneen, talaata,... 'one, two, three, ...' 

miyya wwaaRid, miyya witneen,... '101, 102, ,,,' 
itneen naa?is waaRid yisaawi '2-1=1' 
waaRid. 


*** 


*** 


★ ** 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


166 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


NUMERALS : CARDINAL NUMERAL 'TWO' — INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

The cardinal numeral 'two' is itneen . 

Duality is usually indicated by the dual form of the noun without use 
of a numeral; consequently, itneen has restricted occurrence. The 
following are the most common contexts where it neen is used : 

1. The form itneen may be used to modify a preceding dual ( mascu¬ 
line or feminine ) noun. Since the noun itself indicates duality, 
the effect of the numeral is to emphasize — rather than merely 
to show — duality : 

?andi ktabeen itneen. 'I have just two books.' 

?andi Santiteen itneen. 'I have just two suitcases.' 

2. The form itneen is sometimes used as a noun; in this usage, 
the numeral may be in apposition with a following plural noun : 

(a) iStareet itneen. 'I bought two.' 

(b) ?abilt itneen fallaftiin. 'I met two peasants ( literally : 

"two who are peasants" ).' 

The usage illustrated by sentence (b) is the norm with nouns of 
occupation whose singular is Fa^TaaL . With other nouns, however, 
this usage is possible, but rare; thus it is possible but un¬ 
common to say itneen talamza 'two students'. 

3. The form itneen occurs before a singular counted noun ( q.v.) 
to make that noun dual. 

hat Iina tneen saay. 'Bring us two teas.' 

mafaaya tneen gineeh. 'I have two pounds ( money ).' 

misahtu tneen mitr mrabba?. 'Its area is two square meters.' 

fi gilna tneen milyoon 'There are two million soldiers 

faskari, in our army.' 

4. The form itneen occurs at the end of a compound numeral : 

miyya witneen '102' 

miyya witneen kitaab '102 books' 

an acceptable variant is : 
miit kitaab witneen 


' 102 books' 




EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


167 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


5. The form itneen occurs in counting and in mathematical calculation 


waaFiid, itneen, talaata, ... 

'one, two, three, ... 

miyya wit neen, miyya 

'102, 103, ...' 

wtalaata, ... 


xamsa naa?is talaata 

'5-3=2' 

ysaawi itneen. 



*** *** *** 


NUMERALS : CARVINALS 3 - 10 — INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 


Each of the cardinal numerals 3-10 has two forms : a long form 
which ends in -a , and a short form which ends in a consonant. These 
forms are listed below ( the long forms are on the left, and the short 
counterparts are on the right ) : 


talaata 

talat 

'3 

arba?a 

arbaT 

'4 

xamsa 

xamas 

'5 

sitta 

sitt 

'6 

sab^a 

saba^ 

'7 

tamanya 

taman 

'8 

t i s?a 

t isaT 

'9 

Tamara 

TaSar 

'10 


The short forms occur before counted nouns other than singular count 


nouns ( SCN , q.v. ) ; the long forms 

talat kutub 
talat banaat 
talaata gneeh 
Tandi talaata 


occur elsewhere : 

'three books' 

'three girls' 

'three Egyptian pounds ( money )' 
'I have three' ( Here the numeral 
is used as a noun. ) 


The following facts should be noted : 


1. The counted noun follows the numeral. 




EGVPTUN ARABIC 


168 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


2. Unless it is an SCN, the counted noun is plural. 

3. When used as counted nouns, the forms aF^aaL and aFTuL are 
changed to tiFTaaL and tuFTuL respectively : 

awlaad masriyyiin 'Egyptian boys' 

talat tiwlaad 'three boys' 


azruf kibiira 
xamas tuzruf 


'large envelopes' 
'five envelopes' 


Educated Egyptians sometimes ( though not coitmonly ) use aFTaaL 
and aFTuL as counted nouns without making such changes : 

taiat awlaad 'three boys' 

talat azruf 'three envelopes' 


*** *** *** 


NUMERALS : CARDINALS U - 19 — INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

The cardinals 11 - 19 are : 


Fiidaa^ar 

'll' 

itnaaSar 

'12' 

talattaaSar 

'13' 

arba?taalar 

'14' 

xamastaaSar 

'15' 

sittaaSar 

'16' 

sabaTtaalar 

'17 ' 

tamantaalar 

'18' 

tisa?taalar 

'19' 


The counted noun is singular and follows the numeral : 

tisaTtaaSar walad 'nineteen boys' 

tisaTtaaSar bint 'nineteen girls' 

sabaTtaalar gineeh 'seventeen pounds ( money )' 


*** 


★ ** 


* ** 



EGVPTJAM ARABIC 


169 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


NUMERALS : CARVJNALS 20, 30, 40, _ 90 — JNVEFJNJTE CONSTRUCTION 


The tens above 19 are : 


?iSriin 

'20 

talati in 

'30 

arbi?iin 

'40 

xamsi i n 

'50 

si tt i i n 

'60 

sabTiin 

'70 

taman i in 

'80 

tis?iin 

'90 


The counted noun is singular and follows the 
Tisriin kitaab 'twenty 

TiSriin tarabeeza 'twenty 

?iiriin gineeh 'twenty 


numeral : 
books' 
tables' 

pounds ( money 


*** *** **★ 


NUMERALS : CARDINAL THOUSANDS — INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 


The form for 1,000 is a 1 f , and the form for 2,000 is a If een 
( consisting of a If and the dual suffix -een ). The thousands above 
2,000 are formed by counting the word a If . In this context, a If has 
the plural talaaf which follows the short forms of 3 - 10. The 
singular form a If follows all numerals above 10. 


arba? talaaf 
Fiidaa§ar alf 
waaFiid wi xamsiin alf 
miit alf 
xumsumiit alf 
suttumiyya wwaaFiid alf 
subTumiyya witneen alf 
tumnumiyya wtalaata alf 


'4,000' 

' 11 , 000 ' 

'51,000' 

' 100 , 000 ' 

'500,000' 

'601,000' 

'803,000' 

'815,000' 




EGypTUN ARABIC 


170 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


subTutniyya wsittiin alf '760,000' 
tusTumiyya tisTa wtis^iin '999,000' 
a 1 f 

The counted noun is singular and follows the numeral. Thus raaq i I 
'man' or S !tt 'woman' can be added after each of the foregoing numerals 
without changing the numerical expression in any way. 


★ **★ 

NUMERALS : COMBINATIONS OF 1 - 99 WITH THE CARDINAL HUNVREVS - INDEFINITE 
COMSTRUCTIOW 

The sequence is as follows : the hundreds occur first, followed by 
(a) one of the numerals 1-19, (b) one of the tens above 19, or (c) 
one of the combinations 21 - 99. The forms used in this context are 
the following : the form mi yya , or mi teen , or the forms of 300 - 900 
ending in ^ and the long forms of 3 - 10. The conjunction ^ 'and' 
occurs only once in each sequence — before the last word. 


mi yya wwaaFiid 

'101' 

mi teen witneen 

'202' 

tultumiyya 

wxamsa 

'305' 

rubTumiyya 

wsabTa 

'407' 

xumsumiyya 

witnaalar 

'512' 

suttumiyya 

wsabTiin 

'670' 

sub?umiyya 

sabTa wta1 atiin 

'737' 

tusTumiyya 

tis?a wtis?iin 

'999' 


The counted noun is singular and follows the numeral ( Also note 
Variants ) : 

tultumiyya wwaaHid kitaab ~ '301 books' 

tultumiit kitaab wiwaaFiid 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


171 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


tultumiyya wwaaFiid §anta 

rub?umiyya witneen kitaab 

rubTumiyya witneen Santa ~ 
rubfumiit Santa witneen 

xumsumiyya wtalaata raagil 

suttumiyya xamsa wsabTiin 
saf fSa 

tusTumiyya sab9a wtamaniin 
satr 


'301 suitcases' 

'402 books' 

'402 suitcases' 

'503 men' 

'675 pages' 

'987 lines' 


*** *** ★** 

NUMERALS : COMBINATIONS OF (7} THE CARVINAL MILLIONS WITH NUMERALS BELOW 
ONE MILLION ANV OF (2) THE CARDINAL BILLIONS WITH NUMERALS 
BELOW ONE BILLION -- INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

(1) The millions precede the other numerals. The expression waafiid 
miIyoon ( rather than mi Iyoon ) stands for 'one million'. 

(2) Similarly, the billions precede the other numerals, and the 
expression for 'one billion' is waaFiid bilyoon rather than 
b i Iyoon . 

In (1) and in (2) , the conjunction ^ precedes the last word of the 
numeral as well as the last word of a combination which counts a If , 
mi Iyoon , or bi Iyoon . 

(waaFiid) mi I yoon wi waabid '1,000,001' 

(waabid) milyoon witneen '1,000,002' 

(waabid) milyoon miyya xamsa 
wiiSriin alf suttumiyya 
talaata wtis?iin 


1,125,693' 




EGypTJAN ARABIC 


172 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


sub?umiyya talaata wsittiin 
milyoon tusTumiyya tneen 
wi sab?iin alf miyya 
ta1aata wtalatiin 
(waaFiid) bi 1 yoon wi 
waaFiid 

(waafiid) bilyoon witneen 
tultumiyya talaata wsittiin 
bilyoon tusTumiyya witneen 
milyoon xumsumiyya rbaTa 
warbiTiin alf miteen xamsa 
vvT!i in 


'763,972,133' 


' 1 , 000 , 000 , 001 ' 

' 1 , 000 , 000 , 002 ' 

'363,902,544,225' 


The counted noun is singular and follows the numeral. Thus satr 
'line' or kiIma 'word' may be added to any of the above combinations 
without changing the niomerical expression in any way. 


*★* *** 


NUMERALS : COMBINATIONS OF THE CARDINAL THOUSANDS WITH NUMERALS BELOW ONE 
THOUSAND -- INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 


The thousands precede the other numerals in such combinations. The 
conjunction ^ 'and' precedes the last word in the numeral, as well as 
the last word in a combination which counts alf. 


alf wwaabid 

'1,001' 

talat talaaf witneen 

'3,002' 

saba? talaaf wi sabTa 

'7,007' 

taman talaaf witnaa^ar 

'8,012' 

bidaaSar alf wtisa?taa§ar 

'11,019' 

waaRid wi xamsiin alf 

'51,059' 

tisTa wxamsiin 


miyya xamsa wta1 atiin 

'135,967 


alf tusTumiyya sabTa 
wsittiin 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


173 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The counted noun is singular and follows the numeral. Thus kitaab 
'book' or saf F>a 'page' can be added to any of the above combinations 
without changing the numerical sequence in any way. 

■kiric ft’kie kkic 

NUMERALS : COMBINATIONS OF UNITS WITH THE CARVINAL TENS ABOVE 19 -- 
INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

The forms waahid , itneen , and the long forms of 3 - 9 combine with 
the tens above 19. The unit precedes the ten, and the form ^ is 
used as a conjunction. The combination is thus like the archaic 
English "four and twenty", "seven and sixty", etc. The following are 
examples : 


waaBid wi TiSriin 

'21' 

itneen wi ta 1 at i in 

'32' 

ta1aata warbi?iin 

'43' 

arba?a wxamsiin 

'54' 

xamsa wsittiin 

'65' 

sitta wsabliin 

'76' 

sab?a wtamaniin 

'87' 

tamanya wtis?iin 

'98' 

The counted noun is singular and 

follows the numeral : 

waaFiid wi TiMriin raagil 

'21 men' 

waaFiid wi Ti^riin bint 

'21 girls' 

sabTa wtamaniin kitaab 

'87 books' 

sabTa wtamaniin gineeh 

'87 pounds ( money ) 


*** *** *** 

NUMERALS : CONJUNCTION ^ 'and' IN NUMERICAL EXPRESSIONS 

The conjunction ^ 'and' precedes (1) the last word of a compound 
number provided that word is not itself a counted noun, as well as (2) 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


174 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


the last word of a combination which counts a If , milyoon , or bilyoon . 


waaFiid wi Tilriin 
miyya wwaaBid 
tultumiyya xamsa wsittiin 
alfeen xumsumiyya tneen 
wi TiSreen 

suttumiyya w?i§riin milyoon 
tultumiyya xamsa wTiSriin 
alt miteen wi ?a§ara 
subTumiyya wwaaFiid bi lyoon 
miyya waaftid wi sittiin 
milyoon tusTumiyya wsab?iin 
alf miyya tisTa wtisTIin 


' 21 ' 

' 101 ' 

'365' 

'2,522' 

'620,325,210' 


'701,161,970,199' 


*** 


NUMERALS : COUNT NOUNS WITH CARDINAL NUMERALS -- INDEFINITE CONSTRUCTION 

1. The masculine form waaFiid may precede a singular covint noun ( SCN, 
g.v. ) of Class (a); it may also precede an SCN of Class (d). 

waaRid biira 'one serving of beer' 

waaFiid mi lyoon wi '1,000,300' 

tuItumiyya 

Both of the forms waaFi i d and waRda may be used as intensifiers 
modifying a preceding noun other than an SCN; the noun in question 
is singular and the numerical modifier agrees with it in gender : 

kitaab waaRid 'a single book' 

tayyaara waRda 'a single plane' 

2. The form itneen precedes an SCN to make that noun dual : 

itneen Saay 'two teas' 

itneen mailiim 'two milliemes' 

itneen buusa mrabbaSa 'two square inches' 

itneen mi lyoon '2,000,000' 




EGVVTUU ARABIC 


175 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The form it neen can also be used as an intensifier modifying 
a preceding dual noun; since itneen is invariable, there is no 
gender agreement between the noun and the numeral : 

waladeen itneen 'only two boys' 

binteen itneen 'only two girls' 

3. With the numerals 3-10, the counted nouns are plural unless 

they are SCN's. In regard to position, the counted noun follows 
the numeral. There is no gender agreement between the numeral 
and the counted noun. 

talat riggaala 'three men' 

talat sittaat 'three ladies' 

talaata gneeh 'three pounds ( money )' 

If the noun to be counted is a plural of the measure aFTaaL , it 
is usually changed to tiF?aaL ; if the noun to be counted is a plural 
of the measure aF?uL , it is usually changed to tuFTuL- . Educated 
speakers sometimes use aF9aaL and aFTuL as counted nouns without 
these changes. 

xamas ti?laam or 'five pencils' 

xamas a?laam 


xamas tuzruf or 'five envelopes' 

xamas azruf 

4. With numerals above 10, the counted noun is singular. In this case 
the numeral precedes, and shows no gender agreement with, the counted 
noun. 


xamastaasar walad 
xamastaasar bint 
miyya xamsa w?isr i i n 
walad 

miyya xamsa w?isriin 
bint 


'fif teen boys' 
'fifteen girls' 
'125 boys' 

'125 girls' 




*** 


* 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


176 


REFERENCE GUMMAR 


NUMERALS : DEFINITE CARPINAL CONSTRUCTIONS 

A construction consisting of a numeral and a counted noun may be made 
definite in accordance with the rules given below. 

1. The construction consisting of waaFi d ( feminine waFda ) and a 
preceding noun may be made definite by prefixing the definite 
article to the numeral as well as the noun. The more common 
practice, however, is to replace iIwaaFid ( feminine : iIwaFda ) 
by the adjective i Iwafii id ( feminine : i IwaFii ida ) 'the only'. 

ilkitaab ilwaaBid illi 'Tandi 'the one book that I have' 
iSSanta IwaFida Mi Tandi 'the one suitcase I have' 

ilkitaab ilwafiiid illi Tandi 'the only book I have' 
issanta Iwafiiida III Tandi 'the only suitcase I have' 

2. The construction consisting of itneen and a preceding noun is 
made definite by prefixing the definite article to the numeral 
as well as the noun ; 

ilkitabeen illitneen 'the two books' 

iSSantiteen illitneen 'the two suitcases' 

3. Constructions consisting of any other numeral and a following 
count noun are made definite in one of the following ways ; 

(a) The definite article may be prefixed to the numeral; in a 
numerical sequence, it is the first word which takes the 
definite article. Except for the addition of the definite 
article, the construction remains unchanged. 

sabaT kutub 'seven books' 

issabaT kutub 'the seven books' 

miyya wTiSriin bint '120 girls' 

iImiyya wiTi^riin bint 'the 120 girls' 




EGVmAN ARABIC 


177 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


alf suttumivya wtalatiin '1630 houses’ 
beet 

Il?alf suttumiyya 'the 1630 houses' 

wtalatiin beet 


waaFiid I a Fima 
ilwaaFiid laFima 

itneen gineeh 
i I I itneen gineeh 


'one ( serving of ) meat' 

'the one ( serving of ) meat' 

'two pounds ( money )' 

'the two pounds' 


talaata biira 
ittalaata biira' 


'■three beers' 

' -the three beers ' 


(b) The definite article may be prefixed to the numeral in the 
manner specified in 3(a) above, and to the counted noun as 
well. Here, however, the counted noun must be plural, and 
it must precede the numeral. The construction described in 
3(a) is -the usual one, whereas the construction described 
here emphasizes a totality which is translatable by 'all'. 


saba9 kutub 
issaba? kutub 
ilkutub issab?a 


' seven books' 

' the seven books' 

'the seven books, all of the 
seven books' 


miyya wTisriin bint 
iimiyya wfiiriin bint 
i Ibanaat iImiyya 
wTilriin 


'120 girls' 

'the 120 girls' 

'the 120 girls, all of the 120 
girls’ 


alf suttumiyya wtalat- 
iin beet 

i1?a1f sutt umiyya 
wta1 ati i n beet 
i 1 buyuut i I?aIf suttu¬ 
miyya wta lat i in 


'1630 houses' 

'the 1630 houses ' 

'the 1630 houses, all of the 1630 
houses' 




EGYPTIAH ARABIC 


178 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


talaata gineeh 
ittalaata gineeh 
ilginehaat ittalaata 

iritit icitit 


'three pounds ( money )' 
'the three pounds' 

'the three pounds' 


NUMERALS •• FRACTIOWS 


1 as numerator and 

2 

- 10 as denominators 


The forms involved 

here are listed in the 

following table 

right of each singular 

fraction/ the plural 

form is given. 

nuss 


'one-half' 

ansaas 

tilt 


'one-third' 

at 1aat 

rub? 


'one-fourth' 

arbaa? 

xums 


'one-fifth' 

axmaas 

suds 


'one-sixth' 

asdaas 

sub? 


'one-seventh' 

asbaa? 

tumn 


'one-eighth' 

atmaan 

tus? 


'one-ninth' 

atsaa? 

?uSr' 


'one-tenth' 

a?Saar 


2 as numerator and 3,5,7,9, as denominators 

The forms involved here are the duals of tilt/ xums, sub?, and tus? : 


ti1 teen 
xumseen 
sub?een 
tusTeen 


' two-thirds' 

' two-fifths' 

' two-sevenths' 
' two-ninths' 


3 - 9 as numerators and 4 - 10 as denominators 

Each of the simple fractions involved is expressed by a phrase con¬ 
sisting of (a) one of the short forms for 3-9/ and (b) a denominator 
functioning as a counted noun. Since the noun in question is a plural 
of the measure aF?aaL/ the denominator is of the shape tiFTaaL ( see : 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


179 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


"Numerals : The Cardinals 3 - 10" ). Notice, however, that tirba? 
occurs in the place of the expected tirbaa? . 

Listed below are the denominators ; 


t i rbaT 
tixmaa s 
tisdaas 
tisbaa? 
titmaan 
titsaaT 
tiTiaar 


' fourths' 
■fifths' 
'sixths' 
'sevenths' 
' eighths' 

' ninths' 

'tenths' 


The following are examples of the fractions involved : 


talat tirba? 
talat tixmaas 
arba? tixmaas 
arba? tisbaa? 
xamas tisdaas 
xamas tisbaa? 
tisa? ti?Saar 


' three-fourths' 
' three-fifths' 
'four-fifths' 

' four-sevenths' 
' five-sixths' 

' five-sevenths' 
' nine-tenths' 


Denominators above 10 

Each of the simple fractions in this category is expressed by a 
phrase consisting of (a) a numerator, (b) the preposition ?a I a 'over', 
and (c) a denominator. The numerators and the denominators are 
identical to the cardinals. 

waaFiid Tala sabaTtaasar ' Vl7 ' 

tisTa Tala tneen wi TiSriin ' ®/22 ' 
miyya w sab?a Tala tultu- 

miyya xamsa wsittiin '10’^/365’ 

Fractions in construct with nouns or pronouns 

As nouns, fractions of the measure FvTl may occur in construct with 


a following noun or pronoun : 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


180 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


nuss saaTa 'half an hour' 

nussukum 'half of you (p)' 

Fractions combined with cardinals 

Each of the combinations in question consists of (a) a cardinal 
whole number, (b) the conjunction ^ 'and', and (c) a fraction. 

sitt wrub? ' 6 Va ' 

itneen wi talatiin '32 ^/3 ' 

w i tilt 

suttumiyya waafSid wi 
sittiin wi talattaaSar 
9ala sab?a wTiSriin '661 

The use of ii I a 'less' to express fractions 

A phrase consisting of (a) a whole number, (b) ilia 'less' and (c) 
a fraction is a common alternative for expressing a fraction or a whole 
nimiber plus a fraction. For example, instead of talat tirba? 'three 
quarters' we may say waafiid ilia rub? 'one less a quarter'; again, 
instead of waafiid wi talat tirba? 'one and three-quarters' we may say 
itneen ilia rubT 'two less a quarter'. Theoretically, any fraction 
may follow ilia ; in practice, however, only rub? ' a quarter' and tilt 
occur frequently in this position. This construction is most frequently 
used in telling time. 


*** **★ 


NUMERALS : ORVINALS 1-10 

The ordinals 1-10 have both masculine and feminine forms. In the 
following table, the masculine forms are listed on the left, and the 
feminine forms are listed on the right. 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


181 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Masculine 


Feminine 

awwi1 or awwilaani 

'first' 

uula or i 

taani 

'second' 

tanya 

taa 1 it 

'third' 

talta 

raabi ? 

'fourth' 

rab?a 

xaamis 

'fifth' 

xamsa 

saatit ~ saadis 

'sixth' 

satta ~ 

Saab i ? 

'seventh' 

sabTa 

taamin 

'eighth' 

tamna 

taas i ? 

'ninth' 

tasTa 

TaaSir 

'tenth' 

TaSra 


Notice that : 

1. There are two forms for 'first'. As will be explained below, 
awwa1 and uula may be used as nouns or adjectives, while 
awwa1aani and awwaI aniyya may be used only as adjectives. 

2. The ordinals 2-10 are derived from the corresponding cardinals, 
the measure being FaaTiL for the masculine form and Fa?La for 
the feminine form. 

In general, the ordinals 1-10 may be used as nouns or as adjectives; 
both usages are discussed and illustrated below. 


The ordinals 1 - 10 as nouns 

1. Except for awwaIaani , the masculine forms of the ordinals 1-10 
enter into construct with a following singular indefinite noun. 
The second term of the construct phrase may be either masculine 
or feminine; the ordinal number on the other hand, shows no con¬ 
trast for gender. 


daxaIt awwiI beet. 
daxaIt awwi1 ooda. 
kunt xaamis raagii wisil. 
kaanit xaamis sitt wislit. 


'I entered the first house.' 

'I entered the first room.' 

'I was the fifth man to arrive.' 
'She was the fifth woman to 
arrive.' 




EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


182 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


2 . Except for awwa I aan i and awwa I an i yya , the ordinals 1-10 enter 
into construct with a following definite plural noun. The second 
term of the construct may be masculine or feminine ( depending 
on the referent ) ; the first term too may be masculine or feminine 
( depending on the referent ). 


Tali xaamis iiawlaad illi 
nagahu. 

faarida xamsit ilbanaat 
iiIi nagahu. 


'Ali ranks fifth among the boys 
who passed ( the test ).' 
'Farida ranks fifth among the 
girls who passed ( the test ) . 


3. Except for awwa 1 aan i and awwaIan i yya , the ordinals 1-10 enter 
into construct with a following plural pronoun. The ordinal in 
this usage may be masculine or feminine ( depending on the refer¬ 
ent ) . 

huwwa rablThum. 'He is the fourth among them.' 

hiyya rabTithum. 'She is the fourth among them. ' 

The ordinals 1 - 10 as adjectives 

The ordinals 1 - 10 ( including the forms awwaIaani and awwalaniyya ) 
may follow singular nouns, the construction being that of a noun and 
its modifier. The ordinal agrees with the modified noun in gender and 
definiteness. 


ilkitaab il?awwal o£ 
iIkitaab 11?awwalaanI 
IssafFia l?uula or 

IssafFia I?awwalaniyya 
i lyoom 11xaamis 
issana Ixamsa 


' the first book' 

'the first page' 

'the fifth day' 
'the fifth year' 


Phrases consisting of an indefinite noun and a following adjectival 
ordinal are usually idiomatic expressions; e.g., Sana uula means 
'first grade ( of school )' rather than 'a first year'. 


*** 


•kieit 


ititie 


EGVTTIAW ARABIC 


183 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


NUMERALS : ORDINALS ABOVE 10 


The ordinals above 10 are identical to the corresponding cardinals. 
Like the ordinals 1-10, they may be used adjectivally; unlike 1-10, 
however, they are never used as nouns. 

Although the modified noun may be masculine or feminine, the 
ordinals above 1- 10 show no contrast for gender. 

ilyoom iixamsa wtalatiin 'the thirty-fifth day' 

issana Ixamsa wtalatiin 'the thirty-fifth year' 

Mote 

Six forms are used to express the meaning 'last'; those forms and 
their usages are described below. 

1. The form aax ir is used as a noun in construct with a following 
form. The second member of the construct may be a singular 
indefinite noun ( masculine or feminine ), a definite plural noun 
( masculine or feminine ), or a plural pronoun. In all of these 
contexts, the form aaxi r shows no contrast for gender. 


aaxir tilmiiz 'the last student (m) ' 

aaxir tilmiiza 'the last student (f) ' 


aaxir il?awlaad 'the last of the boys' 

aaxir ilbanaat 'the last of the girls' 


axirhum 
axirna 


'the last ( one ) of them' 
'the last ( one ) of us' 


2. The forms axi i r { feminine : axi i ra ) and axraani ( feminine : 
axraniyya , plural : axraniyyiin ) are used adjectivally. The 
modified noun may be definite or indefinite. 


?areet issatr il?axiir ? 
eeh ikkiIma l?axiira ? 
haat Iwalad i(?axraani. 
haat iI bint iI?axraniyya . 


'Have you read the last line ?' 
'What is the last word ?' 

'Bring the last boy.' 

'Bring the last girl.' 



EGVmAM ARABIC 


184 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


haat iIbanaat i l?axraniyyiin. 'Bring the last girls.' 
haat il?awlaacl i l?axraniyy i in. 'Bring the last boys.' 

Phrases like Su?aaI axii r ( where the modified noun is indefinite ) 
are usually idiomatic; e.g., su?aa I ax i i r is translatable by 'a final 
question' rather than 'a last question'. 

★ ** *** ■*** 

NUMERALS ; SINGULAR COUNT NOUNS (SCNj 

Singular count nouns are a small set of forms which are invariably 
singular after a numeral; they may be divided into four classes : 

(a) Nouns which share no structural identity but which are used in 
ordering food, drinks, etc.; e.g., ?ahwa 'coffee', Saay 'tea', 
lafima 'meat', wiski 'whiskey'. 

hatlina xamsa wiski. 'Bring us five whiskies.' 

(b) Certain nouns ( largely loan words ) which designate weight, 
measurement, or monetary value; e.g., q i raam 'gram', kiIuqraam 
'kilogram', miiI 'mile', kilumitr 'kilometer', santimitr 'centi¬ 
meter', qineeh 'Egyptian pound ( money ) ', maI Iiim 'millieme ( an 
Egyptian coin )', ta?riifa 'five milliemes', saay 'piastre ( ten 
milliemes )', IiIin 'five piastres', rjyaaI 'twenty piastres'. 

maysawitalaata malliim 'It is not worth three milliemes. 

(c) All nouns designating measurement when followed by murabba? 

'square' ( feminine : murabbaTa ) or muka??ab 'cubic' ( feminine ; 
mukaTTaba ). 

tisTa mitr mrabba? 'nine square meters' 

sitta buusa mka?9aba 'six cubic inches' 

(d) The forms miIyoon 'million' and biIyoon 'billion' 

itneen mi Iyoon 'two million' 

arba?a bilyoon 'four billion' 


**★ 




*** 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


185 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- 0 - 

GATH 

( See : Exclamations and Oaths ) 

**★ ** * *** 

OBSTRUENTS 

A speech sound which is produced by the obstruction of the breath 
passage con^iletely or to the point of producing friction : a stop 
or a fricative (q-v.). 

★ Hr* ★★★ ★★★ 

OUISSION OF VOWELS 

( See : Vowels : Contraction ) 

★ ★★ ifkit ★★★ 

OPTATIVE STRUCTURES 

Egyptian Arabic has a number of optative structures expressing a 
wish or a desire, e.g. "May God bless you". These structures all 




EGyPTTAN ARABIC 


186 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


refer to the present and futtire whether they have a perfect or imperfect 


verb form, e.g., 

a[Iaah y ixaI I i i k 
sal la I [aahu ?a layhi wi 
sal lam 


'May God keep you' 

'May God pray for and give 
peace to him ( The Prophet )' 


*** *** *★* 


ORAL CAi/ny 

The mouth, which is one of the resonance cavities, is called the 
oral cavity. 


*** *** **★ 


ORGANS OF SPEECH 

The stream of air expelled by breathing passes out of the lungs and 
is used for speech. The larynx is a cartilaginous box at the upper 
end of the trachea or windpipe . The importance of the larynx in speech 
is that it contains the vocal cords , or vocal folds , which are essen¬ 
tially two horizontal folds of elastic tissue. The triangular space 
enclosed by two vocal cords is referred to as the glottis . The tongue 
has four sections ; the apex or tip , the blade or front , the dorsum 
or back , and the root , which forms the front wall of the pharynx . The 
tongue is one of the most important movable articulators . The upper 
front teeth cire important in speech formation. Both the lips are of 
importance in speech. The roof of the mouth may be divided into four 
parts : the alveolar ridge , the convex portion of the mouth just behind 
the front teeth; the hard palate , the portion behind the alveolar ridge; 
the velum or soft palate , the area behind the hard palate; and finally, 
the u%nila , the small appendage that hangs down from the very edge of 


the velum. 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


187 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


There are three major resonance cavities : the mouth, which is known 
as the oral cavity ; the nose, or nasal cavity , and the throat, or 
pharynx ; their main function in speech is to serve as resonators . 

*** 





EGVPTIM ARABIC 


189 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- P - 


PALATAL 


A place of articulation consisting of the tongue blade and the 
palate : /y/. 


•kifk *★* ★★★ 


PARTICLE 


A word, usually uninflected and invariable, used to indicate 
syntactical relationships. In Egyptian Arabic, particles are adverbs 
(q.v.), conjunctions (q.v.), prepositions (q.v.), presentational 
particles (q.v.), pronouns (q.v.), and the vocative particle (q.v.). 
One thing to remember is that no Egyptian particle is exactly the 
equivalent of any given gloss in English. 

*** *★* ieicic 


PASSI(/E : MEANING 

The passive construction always denotes one of the following : 

1. That the agent is unknown. 

2. That the agent is concealed for some reason. 

3. That the agent is obvious and therefore need not be mentioned e.g., 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


190 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


itfiakam Talee bil?i?daam 'He was sentenced to death.' 

The above constraints show why the EA passive construction does not 
contain a phrase such as the underlined one in the following English 
sentence : 

The fugitive was shot by a policeman . 

In some contexts, the passive construction denotes potentiality : 

baTd innabataat tittaakil 'Some plants are edible and some 
wi ba?d innabataat are not edible.' 

matittakiI§. 

Tali yitdiBik Talee bishuula. 'Ali can be easily decieved.' 

samya mil garniila, laakin 'Sarnia is not pretty, but she 
titfiabb. is likeable.' 

Notice that the passive verbs in the above sentences are subjunctive 
in form. 

The instrument used to perform the act can usually be expressed in 
the Arabic passive construction by the preposition /bi-/; thus the sen¬ 
tence 'This letter must be written by hand. ' can be rendered in Egyptian 
Arabic as follows : 

iggawab da laazim yitkitib bilyadd. 


•kitit **•* 


PASSIVE : PASSIVIZABLE VERBS 

The active verbs which may be made passive cu:e those which have a 
recipient of their action, i.e., those which are trcuisitive or ditran¬ 
sitive ( having two recipients ), and those vrtiose action is passed on 
to a noun be means of a preposition ( a verb of the second group and 
the following preposition will be called a "phrasal verb" ). 

1. That transitive and ditransitive verbs may be passivized is 
illustrated by the following examples : 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


191 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Tali fihim iddars. 
iddars itfaham. 


'All understood the lesson.' 
'The lesson was understood.' 


fariid fahhim Tali ddars. 'Farid explained the lesson to Ali. 

iddars itfahhim liTali. 'The lesson was explained to Ali.' 


2. That phrasal verbs may be passivized is illustrated by the following 


examples : 

fariid ?aTad Ta kkursi. 
ilkursi t?aTad Taleeh. 

Tali katab Ta ssabbuura. 
issabbuura tkatab Taleeha. 


'Farid sat on the chair.' 
'The chair was sat on.' 

'Ali wrote on the board.' 
'The board was written on.' 


As used here, the term "phrasal verb" does not embrace every sequence 
which consists of a verb and a following preposition; unless the prepo¬ 
sition transmits the action to a following noun, the sequence is not 
a phrasal verb. Thus the underlined sequence in the example below is 
not a phrasal verb : 

Tali riqiT baTd illigtimaaT. 'Ali returned after the meeting.' 
It must be pointed out, however, that the recipient of a phrasal verb 
is rather loosely defined. In each of the following sentences, the 
underlined word is a recipient for the reason stated after the sentence : 

1. Tali ?aTad Ta kkursi 'Ali sat on the chair' : The chair received 
the action denoted by the verb. 

2. Tali katab bi - I ?aI am 'Ali wrote with the pencil' : The pencil was 
used. 

3. makanS mumkin iImuYanniyyaat yiyannu I i- lxa Iii fa law kaan 
ilTislaam yiharram ilyuna 'Singing girls could not have sung for 
the Caliph if singing had not been permissible in Islam' : The 
Caliph received the benefit of singing. 

Tawziin yiwsalu li-l?amar fi xamas saTaat. il-?insaan mayiwsall 
Ii-1 Tamar bissurTa di 'They want to reach the moon in five hours. 


4 . 




EGyPTIAN ARABIC 


192 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Man cannot reach the moon in such a short time. ' : The moon is the 
object to be reached, and therefore the object which would receive 
the action denoted by the verb. 

5. innaas mumkin yiskunu f- ?aswaan fisSita laakinmiS fisseef 

'People can live in Aswan in the winter but not in the summer.' : 
Aswan is the place to be inhabited, and therefore the place which 
would receive the action denoted by the verb. 

It is thus seen that the recipient is often the object of a preposition 
in a phrase which indicates instrument, beneficiary, destination, or 
place. The passive counterparts of the foregoing five sentences are 
as follows : 

1. ilkursi t?a9ad ?aleeh. 

2. il?alam itkatab biih. 

3. makan^ mumkin yityanna 

IiIxaIiifa law kaan 
i l?islaam yi Fiarram 
iIyuna. ~ 

makan^ mumkin iixaliifa 
yityanna liih law kaan 
il?isiaam yiAarram 
i1yuna. 

4. Tawziin yiwsalu lil?amar 

fi xamas sa?aat. il?amar 
mayitwisi1luus bissurTa di . 

5. aswaan mumkin titsikin 

fiita Iaakin mi^ 
fisseef. 

aswaan mumkin yitsikin fiiha 
fii^ita laakinmiS fisseef. 

A verb, then, is passivizable when it has a direct object; in addition, 
it is often passivizable when it has an item occurring as object of a 
preposition and which is an instrument, beneficiary, destination, or 
place. 


'The chair was sat on.' 

'The pencil was written with.' 
'The Caliph could not have been 
sung for if singing were not 
permissible in Islam.' 


'They want to reach the moon in 
five hours. The moon cannot be 
reached in such a short time.' 

'Aswan is habitable in the winter, 
but not in the summer.' 




*** 


ifkit 



EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


193 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PASSIl/E : SYNTAX 


1. Given an active construction where the direct object of the verb is 
the only recipient : The direct object becomes the subject of the 
passive construction. The passive verb agrees with its subject 
in number, gender, and person. 

suTaad katabit ilmaqaala 'Su'ad wrote the article' 

-■> ilmaqaala tkatabit 'The article was written' 


bahdiluuni mbaarifi 'They treated me contemptously 

yesterday' 

-> itbahdilt imbaarifi 'I was treated contemptously 

yesterday' 

2. Given an active construction where the verb has both a direct object 
and an indirect object : Either the direct object or the indirect 
object becomes the subject of the passive construction. If the 
first option is selected, the preposition 1i- must be prefixed to 
the indirect object. Whether the first or the second option is 
chosen, the passive verb agrees with its subject in number, gender, 
and person. 

fahhimt far! id iddars 'I explained the lesson to Farid' 

-^ iddars itfahhim lifariid 'The lesson was explained to Farid' 

or fariid itfahhim iddars 'Farid was helped to understand 

the lesson.' 


3. Given an active construction with a phrasal verb : The object of 
the preposition becomes the subject of the passive construction. 

The passive verb form shows no agreement with the subject of the 
passive construction; the preposition takes a pronominal suffix 
whose antecedent is the subject of the passive construction. 

ilmahkama Bakamit ?ala 'The court sentenced your friends' 

asdiqaa?ak 

- \ asdiqaa?ak ithakam Taleehum 'Your friends were sentenced' 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


194 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


ilmaFikama Bakamit Talayya 'The court sentenced me' 

-) itfiakam Talayya 'I was sentenced' 

In English, the subject of the active construction may occur in the 
passive construction as object of the preposition ^ ( e.g.. The 

hunter shot the tiger-^ The tiger was shot by the hunter ); in EA, 

the subject of the active construction does not occ\ir in the passive 
construction. 


*** *** *★* 


PASSIl/E : l/ERB FORMATION 


A verb becomes passive when the active form is replaced by the 
corresponding passive form. The passive wrb form takes the prefix 
it- ( ~ in- ). 


katab 'to write' 

?irif 'to know' 
saj |aFi 'to fix' 
baarik 'to bless' 
bahdil 'to treat contempt- 
ously' 


itkatab 'to be written' 
itTaraf 'to become known' 
itsallafi 'to be fixed' 
itbaarik 'to be blessed' 
itbahdil 'to be treated contempt- 
ously' 


It must be emphasized, however, that not all verbs with the prefix 
it- are passive ( see "Measures : Meaning" ); consider, for example, the 
following sentences : 


1. faruu? nattat Ta1i. 

2. Tali tnattat milfaraB. 

3. fataB ilbaab. 

4. a?? ilbaab fa-tfataB 


'Farouk made Ali jump up and down.' 
'Ali jximped up and down out of joy.' 
'He opened the door.' 

'He pushed the door and so it opened. 


Comparing sentences 1 and 2 shows that i tnattat designates reflexivity 
rather than passivity; comparing sentences 3 and 4 shows that i tfataB 
designates yielding rather than passivity. 



EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


195 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


There are instances where an active form has a recipient but does 
not correspond to a form with the prefix it- . To compensate for the 
expected but non-existent colloquial passive, a Standard Arabic passive 
is used : 

Active 
ifitaram 
ixtaar 
istaTmiI 

In Standard Arabic, the passive form of perfect verbs always has /i/ 
as the stem vowel; a preceding vowel is /u/ if short and /uu/ if long. 
The imperfect passive of Standard Arabic always has /u/ as the vowel 
of the prefix; every other vowel in the stem is /a/ if short and /aa/ 
if long. In the speech of many Egyptians, it- and in- are inter¬ 
changeable ( see : "Verb Measures" ). 

★ * ** 


Passive 

'to respect' uFiturim 

' to choose ' uxt iir 

'to use' ustuTmi1 


PASSJl/E PARTICIPLES : VEFIHITENESS 


If it denotes a semantic extension ( see : "Passive Participles : 
Meaning" ), a passive participle is made definite by prefixing i1 - 
to it : 


miS bafiibb i ImaFi^ i . 'I do not like stuffed cabbage.’ 

If it denotes the basic designation ( see : "Passive Participles : 
Meaning" ), a passive participle is made definite by placing iI - or 
iI Ii before it ( i1 - being the more common Of the two ) : 

Indefinite 

tarabeeza mitsanfara 'a sandpapered table’ 


Definite 

ittarabeeza Imitsanfara or_ 'the sandpapered table' 
ittarabeeza Mi mitsanfara 




** * 


*** 




EGyPTUN ARABIC 


196 


REEEREhlCE GRAMMAR 


PASSIVE PARTICIPLES : VERIVATJON 


The passive participles of Measure I triliteral verbs have the follow¬ 
ing forms ; 

1. mafTuul from sound roots; e.g., katab 'to write' : ma kt u u b , Tirif 
'to know' : ma?ruuf . 

2. matTuuT from doubled roots, e.g., Ratt 'to put' : maRtuut , kabb 
'to spill' : makbuub , Rabb 'to love' : maRbuub . 

3. mafTi from defective roots; e.g., da ?a 'to invite' : mad 9i , bana 
'to build' : mabni , nisi 'to forget' : mansi . 


The passive participle of verbs other than Measure I triliterals 
frequently has the same form as the active participle : it is usually 
derived by substituting mi - for the y i - of the imperfect huwwa form, e.g. 


Imperfect Verb Form Active Participle 

yIda I la? 'he spoils (a child)' midalla? 

yiRtall 'to occupy (a territory)' miRtall 
yidaRrag 'he rolls (something)' midaRrag 
yiRa11i 'to sweeten' miRaI I i 


Passive Participle 
mi da I la? 
mifita I I 
midaRrag 
miRa I I i 


A given verb does not yield the passive participle unless that verb 
co-occurs with a form which designates a recipient. Thus the passive 
participle is derived from ; 

1. Transitive verbs : 

?al i qaraR Rasan. 'Ali wounded Hasan.' 

Rasan magruuR . 'Hasan is wounded.' 

2. Verbs whose action is transmitted to a recipient by means of 
a preposition : 

iImaRkama Rakamit ?ala 'The court sentenced Ali to death' 
?a I i b i I ? i ?daam. 

?aIi maRkuum ?aleeh 'Ali is sentenced to death.' 

bil?i?daam. 


3. Passive verbs. ( Note that Passive Verbs have only one parti¬ 
ciple which is passive in meaning. > 



EGVPTTAM ARABIC 


197 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


i I'TeeS i tbaar i k . 'The bread was blessed.' 

i1TeeS mitbaarik . 'The bread is (in a state of 

having been) blessed.' 

As has already been mentioned, the passive participle often has the 
same form as the corresponding active participle. This means that it 
is sometimes difficult to determine whether a form in isolation is the 
active or the passive participle. For example, midalla? may mean 
'(of a child ) spoiled' or 'spoiling ( a child )', depending on 
whether the participle in question is the passive or the active. When 
the source verb is a passive one, such ambiguity is hardly possible ; 
passive verbs usiially yield passive participles, but on rare occasions 
they may yield active participles. 

Two interesting observations should be noted : 

1. No passive participles are derived from verbs of the hollow 
form FaaL ; instead, the participles of the corresponding passive 
verbs are used. Thus there is no passive participle from baa ? 

'to sell', but the meaning which such a participle would denote 
is stressed by mitbaa? ( from itbaa? 'to be sold' ). 

2. Passive participles are rarely derived from sound, doubled, and 
defective verbs of the passive measure itFa?aL ; instead, the 
passive participles of the corresponding Measure 1 verbs are used. 
For example, itkatab 'to be written' seldom yields a passive 
participle, but the meaning which such a particijile would denote 
is expressed by maktuub ( from katab 'to write' ). 

The following statement emerges from these two observations and 
from the fact that passive verbs rarely yield the active participle ; 
only a few verbs of the passive measure itFa?aL yield a participle; 
those cire the hollow forms, and it is the passive participle which they 
usually yield. 

Influence of Standard Arabic 

Under the influence of Standard Arabic, educated Egyptians in the 
majority of cases substitute mu- ( rather than mi- ) for the initial 




EGyPTIASI ARABIC 


198 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


y i - of the imperfect; this "classicism" is often accompanied by two 
other imitations of Standard Arabic : 

1- Deriving the passive participle takes into consideration the vowel 
which precedes the last radical of the inperfect verb form : if 
not already /a/ or /aa/, the vowel in question is replaced by /a/ 
if short and by /aa/ if long. This produces a contrast which 
exists in Standard Arabic : /a/ or /aa/ ( in the specified 
position ) for the majority of passive participles, and /i/ or 
/ii/ for the corresponding active participles. Examples : 


Imperfect Verb Form 
yi?addib 'he disciplines' 
yista?miI 'he uses' 
yisammi 'he names' 
yistagiib 'he responds' 


Active Participle 
mu?addib ~ mi?addib 
mustaTmil ~ mistaTmil 
musammi ~ misammi 
mustagiib 


Passive Participle 
mu?addab 
musta^maI 
musamma 
mustagaab 


Due to certain phonological rules. Standard Arabic includes some 
active participles which — like their passive counterparts — 
have /aa/ before the last radical; the participles worthy of mention 
in this context are the participles derived from hollow triliterals 
of Measure VII and Measure VIII. The lack of distinction exists 
in EA as well. 


2 . /a/ is inserted before the F_ of Measure V and Measure VI tri¬ 

literals in the process of deriving a participle. 

Imperfect Verb Form Active Participle Passive Participle 

yittallab 'he requires' mutataltib mutatailab 

yitnaafis 'he competes (with)’ mutanaafis mutanaafas 


As may be expected, such "classicism" usually occurs when the EA 
participle is identified with a Standard Arabic participle ( i.e., when 
the two participles in question are derived from the same root and the 
same verbal measure ). Since verbs of Measure IV are usually borrowings 
from Standard Arabic, it is not surprising to find that the passive 
participles of those verbs are usually of the measure muFTaL ( rather 


EGyPTJM ARABIC 


199 


REFERcWCE GRAMMAR 


than fniF?iL ) ; e.g., arhaq 'to overbvirden' : murhaq . 

Differentiating the Passive Participles of Derived Verbs from the Active 
Counterparts 

Sometimes a passive participle cannot be differentiated from the 
corresponding active participle by the classicism explained above under 
Influence of Standard Arabic . For example, yidaI la? 'he spoils ( a 
child )' has /a/ as the stem vowel, and for that reason the replacement 
described in item 1 under Influence of Standard Arabic cannot be used 
as a means of differentiating the participles; again, yixtaar 'he chooses' 
like other hollow triliterals of Measure VIII, yields an active partici¬ 
ple and a passive participle both of which have /aa/ before the last 
radical ( this is true in Standard Arabic as well as in EA ). 

In this situation, educated speakers often resort to one of the 
following devices : 

1. Deriving the active participle from the active verb form, and the 
passive participle from the passive verb form, e.g., mi da I la? 

'having spoiled ( a child )' but mitda I la T 'spoiled'. 

2. Using mi- for the active participle and mu- for the passive 
participle; e.g., mixtaar 'having chosen' but muxtaar 'chosen'. 

This device is usually employed when the verb is an active form 
with no corresponding passive form. 

*** *** *** 


PASSIVE PARTICIPLES : GENVER OF SINGULAR 


A singular passive participle shows contrast for gender. The feminine 
singular form results from adding 3 a_ to the corresponding masculine 
form : 


Masculine 
maktuub 
mu st a Tma I 


Feminine 
maktuuba 
rnusta'Tma I a 


masguun 


'written' 

'used' 

'imprisoned' 


masguuna 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


200 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


If the masculine form ends in /i/, /-yya/ is added to produce the 
feminine form : 

Masculine Feminine 

mansi 'forgotten' mansiyya 

mabni 'built' mabniyya 

Under the influence of Standard Arabic, some masculine singular forms 
( derived from verbs other than the Measure I triliterals ) end in /a/ 
rather than /i/. The feminine singular of such participles is formed 
by substituting -aah for the final ^ : 

Masculine Feminine 

musamma 'named' musammaah 

mustasna 'excepted' mustasnaah 

★ ifkie 

PASSIl/E PARTICIPLES : MEANING 

1. "Basic" Meaning 

EA verbs are divisble into two types ( see "Verbs : Aspect" ) : 

1. Those with which b i- does not indicate continuity ( continuity 
being viewed as the feature of an action or an event in progress ). 
Included here are verbs which denote a state e.g., biyifham 'he 
understands', biyi?raf 'he ( usually ) knows'. Included also 

are verbs which denote fixation of location; e.g., b i yuskun 
'he ( usually ) resides'. 

2. Those with which bi- indicates continuity ( as well as repeti¬ 
tiveness, habituality ); e.g., biyidr is 'he is studying', 

biyiktib 'he is writing'. 

For verbs of the first type, the passive participle designates a 
current state ( usually translatable by an English expression which 
consists of 'is / am / are' and a following past participle ); e.g.. 




EGVmAM ARABIC 


201 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


?irif 'to know' : fna?ruuf 'is known', fihim 'to understand' : mafhuum 
'is understood'. 

(a) i1 beet da maskuun . 'This house is inhabited.' 

(b) inta ma?ruuf . 'You are well known. 

For verbs of the second type, the passive participle means 'in a 

state of having been _' where the blank stands for the meaning of an 

English past participle; e.g., katab 'to write' : maktuub 'is in a 
state of having been written', TataT 'to cut' : ma?tuu? 'is in a state 
of having been cut', rabat 'to tie up' : marbuut 'is in a state of having 
been tied up'. 

(c) la?eetu marbuut . 'I found him tied up ( literally : 

"in a state of having been tied up" ) . 

The difference between the two meanings of passive participles becomes 
clear when sentence (a) is compared with sentence (c) : in sentence (a), 
the act of inhabiting is current; in sentence (c), it is not the act 
of cutting but the result of that act which is cxirrent. 

Thus, the passive participle shares certain semantic elements with 
the active participle : from Type 1 verbs, both express a current 
state; from Type 2 verbs, both express a current state brought about 
by a past act ( see : "Active Peirticiples : Meaning" ) . 

To obtain the correct English translation, one must make sure that 
the Arabic participle and the English equivalent occur in comparable 
slots; one must also choose as the English equivalent an expression 
which is appropriate for the slot : 

irrisaala maktuuba . 'The message is (now) written.' 

irrisaala Imakiuuba 'the written message' 

i1 beet mabni . 'The house has (now) been built.' 

iI beet iImabni 'the house which has been built' 

2. Semantic Extension 

Some passive participles may be used either with the basic designation 
or with a meaning ( called the "extension" ) which is similar to but not 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


202 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


identical with the basic designation. For example, masquun can mean 
'imprisoned ( "in a state of having been inprisoned" ) , but it can also 
mean 'a prisoner'; likewise, mafisi can mean 'stuffed ( in a state of 
having been stuffed )', but it can also mean 'stuffed cabbage'. 

simiTt innu mas<quun . 'I heard that he is imprisoned.' 
iImasquun hi rib. 'The prisoner escaped.' 

Difference in regard to aspect ( i.e., verbal force ) is part of what 
distinguishes the basic designation from the extension : while the basic 
designation includes aspect, the extension does not. Compare, for example, 
the participles in the following sentences i 

i ImawduuT da mafhuum min 'This sijbject has been clear 

zamaan. ("understood") for a long time.' 

mafhuum ilkilma di yeer 'The designation of this word 

mafhuum ilkilma dukha. differs from that of the other 

word.' 


Absence of Person Desic 


Unlike verbs, passive participles do not designate person. Thus in 
isolation the form ma?ruuf does not indicate whether reference is to 
first, second, or third person; the same is true of maTruufa and 
maTruf i in. 


4. In some contexts the EA passive participle denotes a potentiality 
which is often expressed in English by the suffix -able . The following 
are examples : 


laazim titkalIim bisoof 'You must speak in an audible 

masmuu? . voice.' 

i IwadT wif\i5 laakin 'The situation is bad but 

muFitama I . tolerable.' 

mawqifak mafhuum . 'Your attitude is understandable.' 


*** 


*** 


*★ * 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


203 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PASSIYE PARTICIPLES : NUMBER 

A. Passive Participles Which Denote a Semantic Extension ( Typically 
Nominal ) 

If a passive participle denotes a semantic extension ( see : 
"Passive Participles : Meaning" ), it may be singular, dual, or 
plural. The dual is formed by adding -een to the singular form : 


Singular 


Dual 

masguun 

'a prisoner (m)' 

masguneen 

masguuna 

'a prisoner (f)' 

masgunteen 

muwazzaf 

'an employee (m) ' 

muwazzafeen 

muwazzafa 

'an employee (f)' 

muwazzafteen 

maSruub 

'a drink’ 

maSrubeen 

musaddas 

'a pistol' 

musaddaseen 


Provided it is derived from a verb other than a Measure I tri¬ 
literal, and provided it denotes a human being, each of the passive 
participles being discussed typically has two plural forms : the 
sound masculine, and the sound feminine; the former results from 
adding -iin to the masculine singular, while the latter results 
from adding -aat to the feminine singular. 

Singular Plural 

muwazzaf 'an employee (m) ' muwazzafiin 

muwazzafa 'an employee (f)' muwazzafaat 

Provided it is derived from a verb other than a Measure I trilit¬ 
eral, and provided that it designates a non-human referent, each of 
the passive participles in question typically has a sound feminine 
plural form : 

Singular Plural 

mudarrag 'lecture room ( in mudarragaat 

a university ) 

'a (chemical) compound' 


murakkab 


murakkabaat 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


204 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


musallas 'a triangle' musallasaat 

musaddas 'a pistol' musaddasaat 

If derived from Measure I triliteral verbs, the passive parti¬ 
ciples in question typically have broken plurals; in this context, 
one of the most common plural measures is maraTi11 . 


Singular 


Plural 

ma9guun 

'a paste' 

maTagi i n 

masguun 

'a prisoner' 

masagiin 

mabsuu1 

'a crop' 

maFias i i 1 

ma?muur 

'a commissioner' 

ma?amiir 

manmiii i Ca 

'a collection (e.g., 

rnagam i i ? 


of stamps)' 



B. Passive Participles Which Denote the Basic Designation ( Typically 
Adjectival ) 

If it denotes the basic designation, a passive participle may be 
singular or plural ( the dual is rarely used ). The plural is 
typically a sound form which results from adding -iin to the mascu¬ 
line singular, and which may modify a masculine or a feminine noun. 

Certain masculine singular forms undergo specifiable changes upon 
the addition of -iin ; those changes are as follows : 

1. If the masculine singular form ends in /i/, /-yy i i n/ is added 
to make it plural : 

Masculine Singular Feminine Singular Plural 

madTi 'invited' madTIyya madTiyyiin 

mitrabbi 'brought up well' mitrabbiyya mitrabbiyy i in 


i rraagiI iI Ii mad?! 
irragleen iili madTiyyiin 
irriggaala lli mad'Tiyyiin 


'the man who is invited' 

'the two men who are invited' 
'the men who are invited' 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


205 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


issitt illi mad’Tiyya 'the woman who is invited' 

issitteen illi mad?iyyiin 'the two women who are invited' 

issittaat illi madTiyyiin 'the women who are invited' 

2 . If the masculine singular form ends in /a/ , /-yiin/ is added 
to make it plural ; 

Masculine Singular Feminine Singular Plural 

musaffa 'filtered' musaffaah musaffayiin 

saa?il musaffa 'a filtered liquid' 

saa?ileen musaffayiin 'two filtered liquids' 

sawaa?il musaffaah 'filtered liquids' 

Combining number and gender contrasts, we get the following forms : 

1. For participles with a semantic extension ( typically nominal ) 

(a) Masculine singular; e.g., masguun 'a prisoner', muwazzaf 
'an employee'. 

(b) Feminine singular; e.g., masquuna , muwazzafa . 

(c) Masculine dual; e.g., masguneen , muwazzafeen . 

(d) Feminine dual; e.g., masgunteen , muwazzafteen . 

(e) Plural 

(i) Sound masculine; e.g., muwazzafiin . 

(ii) Sound feminine; e.g., muwazzafaat . 

(iii ) Broken; e.g., masagiin . 

2 . For participles with the basic designation ( typically adjectival ) 

(a) Masculine singular; e.g., mu?addab 'polite' 

(b) Feminine singular; e.g., mu?adda ba 

(c) Plural; e.g., mu?addabiin . 




* *★ 






EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


206 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PASSIVE PARTICIPLES : PRECEVEV BY kaan 

Like other noims and adjectives, passive participles may be preceded 
by a form of the marker kaan . The meaning of a construction consisting 
of the marker and a following passive participle is obtained by combining 
the meanings of the two constituents ( for the various meanings expres¬ 
sed through use of the marker, see : "Verbs : The Tense/Aspect Marker 
kaan ” ) ; 

Tali muTaddab. 'Ali is polite.' 

Tali kaan muTaddab. 'Ali was polite.' 

Tali biykuun muTaddab filfasl. 'Ali is polite in class.' 

Taii mil naawi ykuun 'Ali does not intend to be 

muTaddab maTaahum. polite with them.' 

*** *** *** 

PASSIVE PARTICIPLES : SYNTACTIC USAGE 

1. When they denote the basic designation { see : "Passive Participles : 
Meaning" ), passive participles usually occur in adjectival slots. 

rameet fingaan maksuur 'I threw a broken cup in the 

fizzibaa 1 a. garbage can.' 

rameet i I fingaan iImaksuur 'I threw the broken cup in the 
fizzibaala. garbage can.' 

Adjectival passive participles agree with the modified noun in 
number, gender, and definiteness ( see : "Adjectives : Adjectival 
Use of Participles" ). 

Passive participles with the basic designation also occur in 
nominal slots : 

iImuTaddab absan min 'A polite person is to be pre- 

?a I i i I iITadab. ferred over an impolite one.' 




EGyVTlAN ARABIC 


207 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Notice however that, when used nominally, a passive participle with 
the basic designation is a contraction of an attributive construction 
thus i lmu?addab in the above sentence stands for iSiaxs i ImuRaddab 
'a polite person'. 

A passive participle may be derived from a verb whose action is 
transmitted to a recipient by means of a preposition ( see : "Passive 
Participles : Derivation" ). When such is the case, the participle 
is invariable in form and always co-occurs with the preposition in 
qviestion; contrasts in number and gender are indicated by pronominal 
suffixes attached to the preposition . 


ilmaFikama hakamit 9ala 
ssitt bi l?i Tclaam. 
issitt di mahkuum 9aleeha 
bil?iTdaam. 
s itt rnafikuum Taleeha 
issitt iImahkuum Taieeha 

sitteen rnafikuum Taleehum 
issitteen i Irrrafikuum 
?aleehum 


'The coiirt sentenced the woman 
to death.' 

'This woman is sentenced to 
death.' 

' a sentenced woman' 

'the sentenced woman' 

'two sentenced women' 

'the two sentenced women' 


raagiI rna fikuum Taleeh 'a sentenced man' 

irraagil iImafikuum ?aleeh 'the sentenced man' 


riggaaia rnafikuum TaIeehum 'sentenced men' 

irriggaala irnafikuum 'the sentenced men' 

Ta1eehum 


In the examples below, the participle is inflected although it is 
followed by a preposition; this is because in the source strings the 
preposition is not a means of transmitting the action of the verb 
to a recipient. 


inriaas yiTrafu ssayyid 
muxtaar fi masr. 


People know Mr. Mukhtar in 
in Egypt.' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


208 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


issayyid muxtaar maTruuf 
fi masr. 

irraagil i Ima^Truuf f i masr 

issitt ilma9ruufa fmasr 

i rragI sen/issitteen 
iImaTrufiin fi masr 


'Mr. Mukhtar is well known in 
Egypt.' 

'the man who is well known in 
Egypt' 

'the lady who is well known in 
Egypt' 

'the two men/women who are well 
known in Egypt' 


2. When used with a semantic extension, a passive participle usually 


occurs in nominal slots : 

!Ima?muur margi?S. 

?abilna lma?muur . 
sa?alt ?an ilma?muur . 
ma?muur ilmanti?a mil 
miwaafi?. 

fiadritak sadii? ilma?muur ? 

*** **■* 


'The commissioner has not returned. 
'We met the commissioner.' 

'I asked about the commissioner.' 
'The district commissioner does 
not agree.' 

'Are you the commissioner's friend 

*** 


PATTERN WITH ROOTS 

Root is a term used in Arabic grammar for the consonant core of a word 
in Egyptian Arabic. It does not occur in isolation, but in any of various 
word patterns. All derivatives of the root ( k-t-b ) , for example, have 
to do with "writing". The basic meaning of the root is modified by the 
various patterns with which it occtirs. Patterns, then, are vowels 
( sometimes accon^anied by certain non-root consonants ) added to the 
root to form a word, e.g.. 


k-t-b 

-a-a- -> 

katab 

'he wrote' 

k-t-b 

ma—a- —> 

maktab 

'office; desk 

k-t-b 

—aa-i- —^ 

kaat i b 

'writer' 


EGYPT!AM ARABIC 


209 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Thus, /k/, /t/ and /b/ of /katab/ are the three radicals that con¬ 
stitute the k-t-b root, whose meaning has to do primarily with writing, 
/-a-a-/ is the vocalic pattern which forms the perfect ( past tense ) 
form /katab/ 'he wrote'. 

Consider : /kaatib/ 'writer' 

/maktab/ 'office, desk' 

/maktaba/ 'library; bookshop' 

The above are some of the derivatives of the root k-t-b , all achieved 
by different vocalic patterns or consonantal-vocalic patterns ; i.e■, 
/-aa-i-/ in /kaatib/ and /ma—a-/ in /maktab/ and /ma— a-a/ in 
/maktaba/. Since the three radicals that constitute the root k-t-b 
are all consonants, we will call it a Sound Triconsonantal Root . 

■kitit *** **•* 


PHARYNGEAL 

A place of articulation consisting of the root of the tongue and 
pharynx forming a stricture / fi, T /. 

*** *** *** 


PHARYNX 


The pharynx is the throat, one of the resonance cavities. 




*** 


*** 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


210 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PHONEME 

The minimal unit of sound which distinguishes two words otherwise 
identical in a language; e.g., English "till" and "dill" differ in 
only one phoneme. Likewise Egyptian Arabic /taab/ 'he repented' and 
/daab/ 'it melted' differ in one phoneme. Such words are referred 
to as a Minimal Pair . A phoneme may have positionally conditioned 
allophones (q.v.). 

•kit-k *** *★ * 

■Oijn A nr ttr-nni m nrtrrritnr 
rriNMOC VCNOUO OC.IMI cimLc 

(a) n (indef) + adj (indef) = Indefinite Phrase 

/walad kibiir/ 'a big boy' 

(b) n (def) + adj (def) = Definite Phrase 

/iIwalad ilkibiir/ 'the big boy' 

(c) n (def) + adj (indef) = Sentence 

/iIwalad kibiir/ 'the boy is big' 

Example (c) above is known as an Equational Sentence . It consists of 
a definite subject and an indefinite predicate. It can be made inter¬ 
rogative by the use of rising intonation. 

* ** ** * ** * 


A look at : kitaab - kutub 'book' 

walad - awlaad 'boy' 

gum I a - gumaI 'sentence' 

kilma - kalimaat 'word' 

shows that plurals of nouns are unpredictable and must be learned for eac 


PLURAL 



EGyPTIAN ARABIC 


211 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


noun separately. Such plurals are referred to as broken plurals . This 
term is in contrast with the regular predictable plurals which are termed 
sound plurals . Examples of the sound plurals are;: 

/fallaah/ 'farmer' (m) /fallaFiiin/ 'farmers' (m) 

(Thus the suffix /-iin/ is the marker of sound masculine plural,). 

/fallaaha/ 'farmer' (f) /fallahaat/ 'farmers' (f) 

(Thus the suffix /-aat/ is the marker of sound feminine plural.) 

With human plural nouns, adjectives agree in number : 

/awlaad kubaar/ 'big boys' 

/banaat kubaar/ 'big girls' 

However, with non-human plural nouns, either plural adjectives or feminine 
singular adjectives may be used : 

/kutub kubaar/ 'big books' 

/kutub kibiira/ 'big books' 

The latter form is sometimes applied even to modify human nouns by some 
speakers of Ea., e.g. : 

/awlaad kutaar/ 'many boys' 

/awlaad kit lira/ 'many boys' 

and /banaat kutaar/ 'many girls' 

/banaat kit lira/ 'many girls' 

icic-k *** 

POSSESSION 

Pronominal Suffixes in Combination with Nouns 
The paradigm is listed here as : 

vocalic set -i 

-ak 
-ik 

-u 


my 

your (m) 
your (f) 
his 



EG/PTIAW ARABIC 


212 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


consonantal set 

-ha 

her 


-na 

our 


-kum 

your (p) 


-hum 

their 


Notice : 

a) With nouns like /kitaab/ 'book' changes resulting from suffixation 
are expected before the consonantal set, e.g. : 

/kitaabi/ 'my book' but /kitabkum/ 'your (p) book' 

(EA does not permit the sequence WCC in a word.) 

b) Also, nouns ending in -iC# will show changes before the vocalic set, 
e.g. : 

/waagib/ 'homework' but /wagbi/ 'my homework' 

(elision of /!/ of -iC# ; see : Vowels : Elision) 

c) Feminine and plural nouns ending in -a# will always be in their con¬ 
struct state before pronominal endings, e.g. : 

/gazma/ 'shoe' 

/gazmiti/ 'my shoe' 

/gazmitha/ 'her shoe' 

/?and/ 'to have'; 'with'; 'in one's possession'; 'at one's place'; French 
chez 

Egyptian Arabic does not have a verb that corresponds to English 'to 
have' as in 'I have a book.' EA expresses this by the particle /Tand/ 
which means 'at', 'to have', 'in one's possession', 'with' or chez . 

/Tand/ can be followed by a noun or a pronominal suffix. Notice the 
forms of the pronominal suffixes with /Tand/, particularly with the 
second set which has an extra vowel : 


Tand 

i 

I have 

( or 

?a nd 

ak 

you (m) 

have 

land 

ik 

you (f) 

have 

land 

u 

he has 

• 

9a nd 

aha 

she has 


?and 

i na 

we have 


9and 

ukum 

you (p) 

have 

9and 

uhum 

they have 


' with me' 


or 


'at my place') 




EGVmAN ARABIC 


213 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


Notice that the pronominal stiffixes here are the same as those suffixed 
to nouns, except for an extra vowel in the consonantal suffixes /-ha/, 
/-na/, /-kum/, /-hum/ —■> /-aha/, /-ina/, /-ukum/ and /-uhum/. 

( See also : Adjectival Phrase Introduced by bitaa? ; Construct Phrases; 
Vowels : Extra) 


*** *** ItHit 


PREFIX 


A formative { a single phoneme or syllable ) placed before a word to 
modify its meaning or derive a new word, e.g. : 

katab 'to write' inkatab 'to be written’ 


-*** Itiiit 


PREFIX OF FUTURITY 

The imperfect verb forms may be preceded by /ha-/ - /hs-/, the prefix 
of futurity . Thus, /-yiktib/ can be preceded by /ha-/ : 

hayiktib 'he will write, he is going to write' 


*** *** *** 


PREPOSITION 

A word used with a noun or a pronoun or adverb to show the relation of 
the noun or pronoun or adverb to some other word in the sentence. Some 
Egyptian Arabic prepositions and prepositional phrases are listed here : 

fi - f in 

Tala " Ta on 

( /?ala/ has the short form /‘Ta/ before the definite article, 
e.g., /?a Imaktab/ 'on the desk' ) 



EGVVTlkM ARABIC 


214 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


taht 

under 

too? 

on; above 

ma9a 

with 

guwwa 

inside; inside of 

?uddaam 

in front of 

wara 

behind 

?and 

Chez; to have 

barra 

outside (of) 

?abl 

before 

ba Td 

after 

gamb ganb 

beside; near 

rn i n 

from 


( /min/ has the short form /mi/ before the definite article, 
e.g., /milwalad/ 'from the boy'; /missitt/ 'from the lady') 

*** *★* 


PRESENTATIONAL PARTICLE 


/aho/ (ms) and /ahe/ (fs) 'here is' are here referred to as presenta¬ 
tional particles . They agree in gender with the singiilar noiin referred 
to, e.g. : 


aho ttaalib innabiih Here is the intelligent student (m) 

ahe ttaaliba nnabiiha Here is the intelligent student (f) 


/ahum/ 'there are' is the plural form of /aho/ and /ahe/. 

Also note the invariable presentational particle /aadi/ 'here is/are'. 


aho (ms) 
ahe (fs) 
ahum (p) 
aho Iwalad 
ahe Ibint 
ahum i1wilaad 
ahum i 1banaat 


here is 

here is 

here are 

Here is the boy. 

Here is the girl. 

Here are the boys. 

Here are the girls. 



EGYmAN ARABIC 


215 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


( See also : Adjectival Phrase Introduced by bilaa? ; Possession ) 

*** *** *** 

PRONOMINAL SUFFIXES WITH CERTAIN PARTICLES 

This section will list paradigms of pronominal suffixes in connection 


with the 

following particles : 

/1 i / ' to, for ' , 

/bi/ 'with, by' 

, /fi/ 'in 

/Tala./ ■ 

on', /wayya/ 'with, in 

possession of and /mln/'from'. 



/li/ 

/fi/ 

/bi/ 

/Tala/ 

1 s 

1 i yya 

f i yya 

biyya 

Talayya 

2 ms 

1 i ik " lak 

f i ik 

bi ik 

Ta1eek 

2 fs 

1 i i k i " 1 i k i 

f iiki 

b i i ki 

Taleeki 

3 ms 

1 i i h 1 uh 

f i ih 

bi ih 

Ta1eeh 

3 fs 

1 i i ha - 1 a ha 

f i iha 

bi iha 

Ta1eeha 

1 p 

1 i i na 1 i na 

f i i na 

bi ina 

Ta 1 eena 

2 P 

1iikum - 1ikum 

f i ikum 

biikum 

Taleekum 

3 P 

1iihum ~ 1ihum 

f i ihum 

biihum 

Taleehum 


/wayya/ 

/min/ 



1 s 

wayyaaya 

mi nn i 



2 ms 

wayyaak 

minnak 



2 fs 

wayyaaki 

minnik 



3 ms 

wayyaah 

mi nnu 



3 fs 

wayyaaha 

minnaha minha 



1 P 

wayyaana 

minnina 



2 P 

wayyaakum 

minnukum " minkum 


3 P 

wayyaahum 

minnuhum minhum 



*** 


*** 


*** 









EGyPUASI ARABIC 


216 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PRONOUN 


A word used to replace a proper name or a noun, or to refer to the per¬ 
son, object, idea, etc., designated by a noun. The following are sets 
of the pronouns and pronominal suffixes of Egyptian Arabic ; 

a) Independent Subject Pronouns : 


ana 

I 

i Fina 

we 

i nta 

you (ms) 

i ntu 

you (p) 

i nt i 

you (fs) 



huwwa 

he 

hutntna 

they 

hiyya 

she 




b) Pronominal Suffixes associated with nouns, particles, and prepositions 
ending in consonants : 


kitaabi 

my book 

kitaabak 

your (ms) book 

kitaabik 

your (fs) book 

kitaabu 

his book 

kitabha 

her book 

kitabna 

our book 

kitabkum 

your (p) book 

kitabhum 

their book 


c) Direct Object pronominal endings suffixed to transitive verbs : 


darabni 

he 

hit 

me 


darabak 

he 

hit 

you 

(ms) 

darabi k 

he 

hit 

you 

(fs) 

darabu 

he 

hit 

him 


darabha 

he 

hit 

her 


darabna 

he 

hit 

us 


darabkum 

he 

hit 

you 

(P) 

darabhum 

he 

hit 

them 



EGYPTIAN 

ARABIC 


217 



REFERENCE GRAMMAR 

d) 

Pronominal Suffixes added to 

verbs 

ending 

in /-a#/ 

. 





warraani 

he 

showed 

me 






warraak 

he 

showed 

you (ms) 






warraaki 

he 

showed 

you (fs) 






warraah 

he 

showed 

him 






warraaha 

he 

showed 

her 






warraana 

he 

showed 

us 






warraakum 

he 

showed 

you (p) 






warraahum 

he 

showed 

them 




e) 

Pronominal Suffixes added to 

certain particles : /Ii/ 'to,for'. 

/bi/ 


'with,by', /fi/ 

'in’, Aala/ 

'on', 

/wayya/ 'with. 

in possession 

of ; 


1 iyya 

to me 



?a1ayya 

on 

me 



1 i i k ~ lak 

to you 

(ms) 


?a1eek 

on 

you 

(ms) 


1 i i k i ^ 1 i k i 

to you 

(fs) 


?aieeki 

on 

you 

(fs) 


1iih " luh 

to him 



?a1eeh 

on 

him 



1 i iha /- laha 

to her 



?a1eeha 

on 

her 



1 i i na 1 i na 

to us 



?a1eena 

on 

us 



1 i i kum 1 i kutn to you 

(P) 


9a1eekum 

on 

you 

(P) 


liihum <- lihum to them 



?a1eehum 

on 

them 





*** 

•kitit 






PRONOUN : PERSONAL 

The independent personal pronouns are listed here for reference : 
singular plural 


ana 

1 

i Fina 

we 

i nta 

you (m) 

i ntu 

you 

i nt i 

you (f) 



huwwa 

he 

humma 

they 

hiyya 

she 






*** 


*** 




EGyPTlAM ARABIC 


218 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PRONOUN : RELATIVE 

( See : Relative Clauses with i11 i ) 

icitif **★ 

PRONOUN OF SEPARATION 


Sentences where the predicate is a definite phrase are relatively few. 
Most definite phrases functioning as predicate must be preceded by a 
pronoun whose antecedent is the subject. The pronoun in question is 
called "the pronoun of separation" because it separates the predicate 
from the subject. When the predicate is a construct phrase, the occur¬ 
rence of the pronoun of separation is optional. 


issayyid aftmad huwwa 
I?ustaaz igg id i id . 
muna hiyya I bint i1 I i 
t?awwarit . 

dool humma ttalamiiz ilii 
kasaru ssibbaak . 

?aIi huwwa ttawiiI . 
ustaazak huwwa ana . 
tilmizii h iyya suzaan . 
iIkitaab iI Ii ?ult i lak 
?annu huwwa da . 
suha (hiyya) tiImiztI . 
iImutaTaI Iimiin (humma) 


'Mr. Ahmad is the new professor. 

'Muna is the girl who was 
injured.' 

'These are the students who 
broke the window.' 

'Ali is the tall one.' 

'Your teacher is me.' 

'My student is Suzanne.' 

'The book I told you about is 
this (one).' 

'Suha is my studient.' 

'The educated people are the 
strength of the nation.' 


quwwit i Ibalad . 


★ ★★ 


*** 





BGVmAN ARABIC 


219 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


PRONOUN : SUFFIXES WITH AUXILIARIES 


Pronominal suffixes may be added to /laazim/ 'it is necessary', 
/yimkin + I-/ 'it is possible', /yadoob/ 'to have just done something' 
and /yareet/ 'to wish'. 


lazmu yidris . 
lazmak Aaaga ? 
lazmak tidris . 
da mil lazimni . 
yimkinlak tiruuB diiwa?ti 
yadoobu wisll . 
yaretni marufitil . 


'He needs to study.' 

'Do you need something?' 
'You must study.' 

'I don't need this.' 

'You may go now.' 

'He has just arrived.' 

'I wish I hadn't gone.' 


*«* «** •** 


PRONOUN : SUFFIXES WITH VERBS 

/?ul11/ 'tell me' is the verb /?aal/ (Q) 'to say' in the imperative 
/?uul/ plus the preposition /-I-/'to' plus the pronominal suffix /~i/ 
'me'. The pronominal suffixes associated with p 2 u:ticles and nouns 
were discussed in the entry entitled 'Pronoun'. 


This section-lists 

object pronoun + 

the pronominal suffixes added 

as 

objects of 

/darab/ 

'to hit' 

; + /fiabb/ ' 

to 

like, love' 

1st 

person 

s 

darab 

ni 

fiabb 

i 

n i 

2nd 

person 

ms 

darab 

ak 

fiabb 


ak 

2nd 

person 

fs 

darab 

ik 

fiabb 


ik 

3rd 

person 

ms 

darab 

u 

fiabb 


u 

3rd 

person 

fs 

darab 

ha 

fiabb 

a 

ha 

1st 

person 

P 

darab 

na 

fiabb 

i 

na 

2nd 

person 

P 

darab 

« • 

kum 

fiabb 

u 

kum 

3rd 

person 

P 

darab 

hum 

fiabb 

u 

hum 


Notice : 

a) The forma are all the same, irrespective of whether they are added 



EGVFTIM ARABIC 


220 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


to verbs, particles, prepositions or nouns, except for the first person 
singular which is always /-ni/ after verbs . 

b) Of more importance, please note that in /Fiabb/ above, the helping 
vowel .which is almost always /*i-/ changes to /-a-/ before /-ha/ and 

to /-u-/ before /-kum/ and /-hum/. It may help you to remanber this if 
you note that the helping vowel in these instances is the same as the 
vowel of the suffixes in /-aha/, /-ukum/, /-uhum/. 

c) Another thing worth mentioning here is that the singular forms of the 
pronominal suffixes will show certain differences in form according to 
whether the verb, particle or noun to which they are added ends in a 
consonant or vowel. 

Study the following paradigms ; 


After -C After -V 


1st person s 

-i. / -ni 

(after verbs) 

-ya 


2nd person ms 

-ak 


-k 


2nd person fs 

-ik 


-ki 


3rd person ms 

-u C- - 

hu) 

-h -hu) 


3rd person fs 

-ha 


-ha 


1st person p 

-na 


-na 


2nd person p 

-kum 


-kum 


3rd person p 

-hum 


-hum 


Examples : 





kitaab 'book' 


kitaabi 

'my book' 


wara?a 'a piece 

of paper' 

wara?t i 

*my paper' (CS 

of f used) 

darab 'he hit' 


darabni 

'he hit me' 


Fiabb 'he liked' 

Fiabb in i 

'he liked me' 


ax 'brother' 


axuuya 

'my brother' 


wara 'behind' 


waraaya 

'behind me' 


Examples of the occurrence of the variant form 

/-hu/ in the 3rd 

person ms 


katabu 'he wrote it (mj' 

katabulha " katabhulha 'he wrote it (m) to her 

makatabulhaaS 'he did not write it (m) to her' 










EGVniAN ARABIC 


221 


REFERENCE GRAMiWAR 


- a - 


aAAF 


( See : Glottal Stop ) 


*** *** *** 

QUMRlLITERAL ( = QUAVRITIADJCAL) VERB 

A verb (q.v.) having four radicals (q.v.) or constituent elements, 
e.g., /targ im/ 'to translate', /zalzil/ 'to shake' ( reduplicative 
verb, q.v. ). 

*** *** *** 

QUESTIONS : ALTERNATIVE QldESTIONS 

An alternative question presents two or more choices which presumably 
include the answer. 

iggaww fmasr Barr walla bard ? 'Is the weather in Egypt hot or cold 

In EA, alternative questions are characterized by the presence of 
/walla/ 'or' ( notice that the word for 'or' in EA statements is usually 
/aw/ ). While the English word 'or' occurs only once in a given alter¬ 
native question, the EA word /walla/ occurs between each pair of choices : 



EGYPTIM ARABIC 


222 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


tistayal ma?aaya walla ma?aaha 'Would you like to work with me, 
walla maTa fiseen ? with her or with Hussein ? 

EA has two intonation patterns for alternative questions : one that 
ends with a rising pitch, and euiother that ends with a falling pitch. 

Of these, the former is considered the more courteous. 

tihibb nu??ud f i Imunit azah walla n irqa? i ll beet. ? 

•Would you like us to stay in the park or to go home? ' 

tifiibb nu??ud fi Imu nitazah wa I la n irqa? i ll b^t ? 

'Would you like us to stay in the park or to go hone?' 


*** -*** 


QUESTIONS : INFORMATION QUESTIONS 

An information question solicits new information as an answer ( in 
contrast with yes-or-no questions which solicit "Yes" or "No", and 
in contrast with alternative questions which presumably contain the 
answer ). The set of question words used here excludes walla 'or' 
and ha I . 

The intonation patterns associated with information questions are 
represented below. The first is considered more courteous than the 
second ; 

?areet j i I kitaab da leeh^? 'Why did you read this book?' 

?areet ilkitaab da leeh ? 'why did you read this book?' 

* t 

Notice that the second intonation pattern is used frequently with 
English information questions. The first pattern is used in English 
to convey reassurance or protest : 

1 1 won 't hurt you!. 

That's inpt what I meant^ 

With respect to grammatical structure, a statement is changed to an 
information question by substituting the appropriate question word for 



EGyPTIAW ARABIC 


223 


REFERENCE GRAMAMR 


a given constituent. We shall call the expression to be replaced "the 
questioned constituent". In the following example, the questioned 
constituent is the adverbial baTd idduhr 'in the afternoon'. 

(Sayirga? ba?d idduhr —J 'He will return in the afternoon.' 

fiayirga? imta ? 'When will he return?' 

The question word usually occupies the slot previously occupied by the 
questioned constituent. In many cases, however, the question word may 
be transposed to sentence-initial position : 

Rayirga? imta ? —imta Rayirga? ? 'When will he retiirn?' 

Transposition is rather rare in the following situations : 

1. When the questioned constituent is related by strong cohesion to an 
adjacent constituent, e.g., when the questioned constituent is the second 
term of a construct phrase or the object of a preposition. If it does 
occiiT in this situation, transposition must involve two constituents; 
the question word, and the closely related constituent. In the follow¬ 
ing examples, the questioned constituents are underlined, and relatively 
rare constructions are identified by an asterisk : 


maRmuud saaRib iIwaziir ?-■> 
mafimuud saaRib miin ? — 
♦saaRib miin maRmuud ? 

ilkitaab ma9a samiira —^ 
iikitaab ma?a miin ? —^ 
♦maTa miin iIkitaab ? 


'Mahmoud is the minister's friend 
'Whose friend is Mahmoud?' 

'Whose friend is Mahmoud?' 

'The book is with Samira.' 

'With whcsn is the book?' 

'With whom is the book?' 


2. When the questioned constituent is the direct or the indirect object 
of a verb. Thus §aafu rraagiI 'They saw the man' yields §aafu miin ? 
'Whom did they see?' but rarely * mi in saafu ? . Likewise, fahhimit ?al i 
ddars 'She helped Ali to understand the lesson' commonly yields fahhim i t 
miin iddars ? 'Whom did she help to understand the lesson?' but rarely 
♦ miin fahhimit iddars ? . Notice that miin irraagiI illi Safuu ? 'Who is 
the man that they saw?' involves no transposition. ■It is derived from 
a sentence whose subject is the questioned constituent : 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


224 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


huwwa rraagi I ill i safuuh —'He is the man that they saw.’ 
mi in irraagi I illi Safuuh ? 'Who is the man that they saw?' 

Listed below are the most common of the question words which occur in 
information questions. The list includes glosses and relevant cranments 
and examples. 


1. eeh 'what?' : Replaces a non-human 

katabit kitaab —^ 
katabit eeh ? 

?ara maqaala ---♦ 

?ara eeh ? 

fiih kitabeen Ta ttarabeeza -- 
fiih eeh ?a ttarabeeza ? 

iStaru Ikutub —^ 
iStaru eeh ? 

2. miin 'who?* : Replaces a hurneui 

?ali fiI beet 
miin fiI beet ? 

?abl it samiira --A 
?abl it m i in ? 

zi ?i 1 min i Iwaladeen —A 
zi9iI min miin ? 

di kutub iIbinteen —A 
d i kutub mi in ? 

dool aw Iaadi —A 
dool miin ? 

idduktoor wabbax iImumarri 
idduktoor wabbax m iin ? 


noun. 

'She wrote a book.' 

'What did she write?' 

'He read an article.' 

'What did he read?' 

'There are two books on the. table. 
'What is there on the table?' 

'They bought the books.' 

'What did they buy?' 

noun. 

'Ali is at home.' 

'Who is at home?' 

'She met Samira.' 

'Whom did she meet?' 

•He was angry with the two boys.’ 
'Whom was he angry with?' 

'These are the two girls' books,.' 
'Whose books are these?' 

'These are my sons.' 

'Who are these (people)?' 

_^ 'The doctor scolded the nurses.’ 

'Whom did the doctor scold?' 


3. anhu , anhi and anhum 'which?* : These three forms replace definite 
adjectival constituents. The first is selected ^<riien the modified 
noun is masculine singular, the second when the modified noun is 
feminine singular ( or non-human plural ) and the third when the 




EGyPTlM ARABIC 


225 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


mcxiified noun is either dual or plural. 

Fiayi?ra Ikitaab iggidiid — 

Fiayi?ra Ikitaab anhu? 

f>ay?aabil irraagil i l?amr ikaan i —? 
fiay?aabil irraagil anhu ? 

ilmaqaala tna^rit figgariida 
ssu?ud iyya 

ilmaqaala tnaSarit figgariida anhi ? 

raaFi iddukkaan maTa I bint i I I i 
wiSiaha mdawwar —■> 
raafi iddukkaan maSa Ibint anhi ? 

il?ustaaz ?aayiz ilkutub iI?adiima —> 
il?ustaaz 9aayiz ilkutub anhi ? 

hayaaxud ilkitabeen dool —-s* 
hayaaxud ilkitabeen anhum ? 

Ray?aabil i Imuwazzafteen iggudaad — 
fiay?aabil iImuwazzafteen anhum ? 

it?arrafit ?ala rragleen 
il?ira?iyyiin — 

itTarrafit ?ala rragleen anhum ? 

fiayitkall im ma?a Imuwazzaf iin 
iI I i fmaktabak —> 
fiayitkall im ma9a imuwazzaf iin 
anhum ? 

biyitkallim ?an ilbanaat i11i 
fsaffu — 

biyitkallim fan ilbanaat anhum ? 


'He will read the new book.' 

'Which book will he read?' 

'He will meet with the Americ 2 ua man.' 
'Which man will he meet with?' 

'The article was published in the 

Saudi newspaper.' 

'Which newspaper was the article 
published in?' 

'He went to the shop with the 
round-faced girl. 

'Which girl did he go to the store with? 

' The professor wants the old books.' 
'Which books does the professor want?' 

'He will take these two books.' 

'Which two books will he take?' 

'He will meet with the two new employees 
'Which two employees will he meet with?' 

'She got acquainted with the two 
Iraqi men.' 

'Which two men did she get acquainted 
with?' 

'He will talk to the employees (m) 
who are in your office.' 

'Which employees will he talk to?' 

'He is talking about the girls 
who are in his class.' 

'Which girls is he talking about?' 


A construction consisting of a noun and one of the postnominal question 
words anhu , anhi and anhum may be replaced by a construction in which the 
question word is pre-naninal. Thus the following constructions are equi¬ 


valent i 



EGYPTUN ARABIC 


226 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


(a) ilmadrasa ahhi ? 'which school?' 

(b) anhi niadrasa ? 'which school?' 


It must be stressed, however, that the two constructions under discussion 
differ in two important respects: 

(a) While the modified noun in construction (a) is definite, the 
modified noun in construction (b) is indefinite. 


ilbint anhi ? 'which girl?' 

anhi bint ? 'which girl?' 

(b) While the question word in construction (a) shows contrast for 
both number and gender, the question word in construction (b) shows 
contrast for neither. The prenominal slot of construction (b) is usually 
occupied by anh! ; anhu is interchangeable with anhi , and anhum does not 
usually occur. 


anhi/anhu waiad ? 
anhi/anhu bint ? 
anhi/anhu riggaala ? 
anhi/anhu sittaat ? 


'which boy?' 
'which girl?' 

' which men?' 
'which women?' 


4. imta 'When?' ; Replaces and.adverbial of time. 


Fiaysaaf ir bukra —^ 
ha ysaafir imta ? 


'He will leave tomorrow.' 
'When will he leave?' 


Fiayirga? lamma yitxarrag 
miggam?a — 
fSayi rga? imta ? 


'He will return when he gradu¬ 
ates from the university.' 
'When will he return?' 


5. feen 'Where?': Replaces an adverbial of place. 


kaanit sakna hina —^ 
kaanit sakna feen ? 

it?ablu f iSSaar i? — 
it?ablu feen ? 

la?athum makaan ma sabithum — 


'She used to live here.' 
'Where did she used to live?' 

'They met in the street.' 
'Where did they meet?' 


ia?athum feen ? 


'She found them where she had left them.' 
'Where did she find them?' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


227 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


6. mineen 'from where?': Replaces a prepositional phrase consisting 
of min 'from' and a following expression of place. 


amaaI min masr — 
amaaI mineen ? 


'Amal is from Egypt.' 
'Where is Amal from?' 


iltara Ikutub di middukkaan 
i i 1 i saPibu Saami —> 
iltara Ikutub di mineen ? 


'He bought these books from the 
shop whose owner is a Syrian.' 
'From where did he buy these books? 


7. izzaay 'how?'; Replaces an adverbial of manner. 

biyimli bisur?a —'He walks fast.' 
biyimli zzaay ? 'How does he walk?' 


8. iee - leeh 'why?'; Replaces an adverbial of purpose or cause. 

raafiit faransa ?alaan 'She went to France in order to 

tidr is itt ibb —> study medicine.' 

raafiit faransa lee ? 'Why did she go to France?' 

biyikrahha ^asaan bitikrahu —> 'He hates her because she hates him 
biyikrahha lee ? 'Why does he hate her?' 

9. iImiTna ; Replaces an adverbial of cause or purpose to indicate that, 
in the soxirce sentence, the modified constituent is contrasted with 
or opposed to another constituent; 

?ali biyzurna ^asaan biyfiibbina , 'Ali visits us because he likes 
laakin amaal mil bitzurna —us, but Amal does not visit us.' 
i ImITna ?al I biyzurna ? 'How come Ali visits us?' 

In the source sentence of the above example, the expressions which 
are opposed to each other are (a) the modified constituent ?aIi 
biyzurna 'Ali visits us', and (b) the constituent amaal mil bitzurna 
'Amal does not visit us.' Notice that the second of these is deleted 
by the transformation which derives the question from the statement, 
but the context indicates what has been deleted. 


10. kaam 'how many'; Replaces a numeral and is followed by a singular- 
indefinite noun. 


9andu talat kutub —•> 


?andu kaam kitaab ? 


'He has three books.' 

'How many books does he have?' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


228 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


In addition to the above, two interrogative expressions occur frequently 
in EA: maal , and maa I w i maa I . An attempt to postulate underlying con¬ 
stituents would complicate the presentation unnecessarily. We shall there¬ 
fore be content with delineating their meanings and commenting on their 
co-occurrence relationships. Notice that in all contexts maa I is fol¬ 
lowed by a noun or a pronoun. 

11. maal ( = ma + I- ) has three common meanings: 

(a) It means 'why?' when followed by a subject and a predicate, 

maalu saakit kida ? 'why is he so quiet?' 

maal samiira bitza?9a? ? 'why is Samira yelling?' 

(b) It denotes inquiry about relation or interest if preceded by 

the subject of the sentence and followed by a pronominal suffix 
which refers to the subject. ( ma + I- + pronominal suffix ) 
inta maalak ? 'what's your business?' 

?al i maalu bilk ? 'What has Ali got to do with you?' 

(c) It is tTcmslatable by 'what's the matter with . . . ?' in most 
of the remaining contexts. 

maalak ? 'What's the matter with you?' 

maal fariIda ? 'What's the matter with Farida?' 

12. maal wi maal usually inquires about relation or interest. Each 
occurrence of maaI in the expression is followed by a noun or a 
pronominal suffix. 

maal ?al i wmaalak ? 'What has Ali got to do with you?' 

maalu wmaal far i Ida ? 'What has he got to do with Farida?' 

malha wmaal i ? 'what has she got to do with me?' 

icitit *** ifkit 


QUESTIONS: TAGS 

English has a set of sentences, called "tag questions", each of which 
comprises a statement and a following interrogative "tag". In the fol¬ 
lowing examples, tags are underlined : 


EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


229 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


He's a pilot, isn't he? 

He'll go, won't he? 

You Ccm't go, can you? ' 

KA employs tags of which the most common are listed and illustrated below: 

1. mil kida ? 'isn't that so?' 

inta taal ib. mi§ kida ? 'You're a student, aren't you?' 

(literally: 'You're a student, 

isn't that so?) 

2. walla eeh ? 'or what (is the fact)?' 

inta taal ib. walla eeh ? 'You're a student, aren't you?' 

(literally: 'You're a student, 

or what are you?' ) 

3. walla la? ? 'Or isn't it so?' 

inta taal ib. walia la? ? 'You're a student, aren't you?' 

(literally: 'You're a student, 

or isn't it so?') 

4. walla ana yaltaan ? 'Or am I mistaken?' 

inta taal ib. walla ana yaltasn • 'You're a student, or are you?' 

(literally: 'You're a student, 

or am I mistaken? ') 


Notice that each of the last three tags begins with the word walla 'or' . 
Note the following: 

1. While English tags are preceded by a sustained pitch (represented 
in the script by a comma ), EA tags are usually preceded by a falling 
pitch ( represented in the script by a period ). 

2. English tags may end in a rising or a falling pitch ( the difference 
in pitch being parallel to a difference in meaning ). EA tags, on the 
other hand, usually end in a rising pitch. 

3. Both the subject and the verb of a given English tag are determined 
by the preceding statement: 

He go, he? 

You have a book, h^en^ you? 




EGyPTJM ARABIC 


230 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


On the other heuid, the EA tags listed above are largely interchangeable ; 

inta taal ib. mil kida ? / 'You.*'re a student, aren't you?' 

walla eeh ? / walla la? ? / 
walla ana ’ 

4. In regard to negation, an English tag may be similar to or different 
from the preceding statement ( with a distinct meaning in each case ) : 

You're going to fire me, aren't you? 

You're going to fire me, are you? 

No such relationship exists between an Arabic tag and the preceding 
statement. 


*** *4r* 


aUESTIONS : yES-OR-NO QUESTIONS 

A yes-or-no question is one which solicits "Yes" or "No" as an answer. 

The following is an example : 

llfiaala ligtlma?lyya tfiassinit ? 'Has the social situation improved?' 
Two important facts must be noted: 

1. The structure of a yes-or-no question is usually, identical to that 
of the corresponding statement. Of the following pair, the first sen¬ 
tence is a statement and the second is a question : 

lggam?a dl malhuura 'This university is famous.' 

iggam?a dl malhuura ? 'is this university famous?' 

Under the influence of Standaird Arabic, educated Egyptians—when 
speaking in semi-formal situations—^may place the particle ha I at the 
beginning of a yes-or-no question. Thus a professor lecturing in EA may 
ask the following question rhetorically : 

ha I min llma??uul Inn umma 'Is it reasonable to assume that 

I 11 ha I ?adab Irraf119 da a nation with such exquisite 

t Ikuun bldaa?lyya ? literature is primitive?' 




EGYPTIAN APASIC 


231 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The vrard ha I has no lexical equivalent in English. It means 'What fol¬ 
lows is a yes-or-no question.' 

2. An English yes-or-no question may end in a rising or a falling pitch. 

In the following examples, a line is used to represent the pitch pattern 

. _ - 

Are you fromi France? 

Are you from! 

An Arabic yes-or-no question, on the other hand, always ends in a 
rising pitch. This is hardly surprising since EA yes-or-no questions 
are usually identical to the corresponding statements in grammatical 
structure. 

The following forms are common responses to EA yes-or-no questions : 


Prince ? 


aywa. 

aa. 

naTam. 
ay natam. 
tab7an. 
akiid. 
qat?an. 

biduun lakkor bila ^kk, 

?urrmai [. 

la?. 

abadan. 
mu stafii i I. 


’ Yes.' 

'Yes.' (very casual) 

'Yes.' (formal) 

'Yes.' (very formal) 

' Of course I' 

' Certainly1' 

'Definitely!' 

'Without a doubt!' 

'Of course! What did you thinlc?' 
' No.' 

'Not at all! ' 

' Impossible!' 


*** 


★ * ★ 


"kit 





EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


233 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- R- 


RAtJICALS •• TYPES 

A "radical" is a root consonant; e.g., the root ktb consists of the 
radicals /k/, /t/ and /b/. 

There are two types of radicals : sound and weak . A sound radical 
is one which always has a consonantal realization. In contrast, a weak 
radical is one which does not always have a consonantal realization. 

Two consonants constitute weaJc radicals : /w/ and /y/. Thus the last 

radical of the root dTw is realized as /w/ in da?wa 'invitation', but 
as zero in da?a 'to invite'. Again, the middle radical of the root yyb 
is realized as /y/ in yiyaab 'absence' , but as vowel length in yaab 'to 
be absent'. 

Consonants other than /w/ and /y/ constitute sound radicals. 

*** *** ititik 


REDUPLICATIVE VERB 


A quadriliteral verb (q.v.) in which the last 
are a repetition of the first two, e.g., zaIz iI 


two radicals 
'to shake'. 


( consonants ) 


*** *** *** 


RELATIVE ADJECTIVE 


( See : Nisba Adjectives ) 










EGWriAN ARABIC 


234 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


RE LATTICE CUUSES WITH ill i 


A typical relative clause construction contains three elements : 

a) an antecedent 

b) the invariable relative pronoiin /ill i/ 

c) a clause 
Examples : 


luft 

(a) 

i 1wi1aad 

(b) 
il 1 i 

(c) 

gaabu 1gawabaat. 

I saw 

(a) 

the boys 

(b) 

who 

(c) 

(they) brought the letters 


Note that the relative clause by itself is a complete sentence, 
it can stand by itself without the relative pronoun : gaabu Igawabaat 

'they brought the letters', /u/, the inflection of the verb gaabu , 
is the formal reference to the antecedent i Iw i laad 'the boys'. 

In the sentence : 


da Igawaab i11 i gabuuh 
imbaar ifi. 


•This is the letter which they 
brought yesterday.' 


the object of the verb gabuuh 'they brought it' refers to the antece¬ 
dent. 

In the sentence : 

da Iwalad ill i ktaabu daaT 'This is the boy whose (his) 

book got lost,' 

the suffixed pronoun on kitaab is the reference. 

In the sentence : 

feen ilkitaab ill i lultilak 'Where is the book which 1 talked 

^aleeh ? to you about (it) ? 

the reference is through the preposition and its object taleeh 'about it' 
Note that the above examples have definite antecedents. If the antecedent 
is indefinite, there is no relative pronoun in the construction. 

Compare : 

suft iiwi laad ill! gaabu 
I gawabaat 


' I saw the boys who brought the 
letters.' 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


235 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


and : 

Suft wlaad gaabu gawabaat. 'I saw (some) boys who had brought 

(some) letters.' 

Note the relative constructions in the following examples ; 

a) irraagil da I I i byiSrab laay almaani. 

'This man who is drinking tea is German.' 

b) ' ilwalad da lli ?aa?id ganb iI bint ismu saami. 

'This boy who is sitting next to the girl is named Sami (his name is Sami) .' 

c) issitt ill! min faransa safrit imbaarifi. 

'The lady who is from France left (traveled) yesterday.' 

d) ilwalad illi hnaak da ^Fibi. 

'That boy (who is) over there is my friend.' 

e) illi faat maat . (Proverb) 

'That which is done is done.' ( Lit. « 'That which has passed has died.' ) 

f) feen illi ?ultilak Taleeh ? 

'Where is that which I talked to you about (it)?' 

g) ilwalad illi smu saami saFibi. 

'The boy whose name is Sami is my friend.' 

h) irraagil illi §uftu imbaariFi saafir innaharda. 

'The man whom you saw yesterday left (traveled) today. 

i) ilwalad huwwa lli naam. 

'It's the boy who slept.' 

( See also : Adjective : Relative Clauses ) 

itiHr ieifk ititit 


RELATIVE PRONOUN : illi 

( See : Adjective : Relative Clauses; Relative Clauses with illi ) 


*** 




ititit 


EG/PHAN ARABIC 


236 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


RESONANCE CAl/ITIES 

There are three major resonance cavities : the mouth, which is known 
as the oral cavity; the nose or nasal cavity; and the throat or pheurynx. 
Their main function in speech is to serve as resonators. 

*** *** *** 


ROOT 


A term used for the core of a word in Arabic and in other Afro-Asiatic 
languages. Most Egyptian Arabic words consist of a triconsonantal ( c.f. 
also triradical or triliteral (q.v.) ) root. Biradical ( also biliteral ) 
roots are less frequent and consist of two consonants. Roots with 
four consonants ( quadriliteral or quadriradical ) occur in Egyptian 
Arabic, but rarely. A root occurs with patterns (q.v.). A pattern can 
be vocalic and/or consonantal. The root normally has a certain meaning 
attached to it. The basic meaning of the root is modified by the pattern. 
Compare the following words : 


katab 

'to write 

kitaab 

•book' 

maktaba 

'library' 

kaat ib 

'writer' 


The words in question share a set of consonants ( /k/, /t/ and /b/ ) which 
invariably occxur in the same order. Furthermore, those words share a 
semantic element : all of them have to do with writing ( katab designates 
the act of writing ; kitaab a volume made up of written or printed pages; 
maktaba a place vrtiere written or printed volumes are kept; and kaatib one 
who writes ). It is reasonable to assume that the shared meaning belongs 
to the shared form. In other words, it is reasonable to assume that ktb 
is a discrete, minimum meaningful entity. 

Entities like ktb are called "roots", and the constituent consonants of 
a root are called "radicals". Listed below are some more roots : 




EGYPTIAN APA31C 


237 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


drs { occunring in daras 'to staidy*, dar s 'lesson*, madrasa 'school, 
d iraasi 'scholastic', etc. ) 

yrf ( occurring in yirlf 'to know', ma?r ifa 'knowledge', etc. ) 
xdm { occurring in sadam 'to serve', xaddaam 'servamt', xidma 'ser¬ 
vice* , etc. ) 

z?l ( occurring in 2i?iI 'to get angry', za?l 'anger', za?laan 
'angry', etc. ) 

skn ( occurring in sakan 'to dwell', maskfn 'abode', Iskaan 'housing', 
sukkaan 'resident, etc. ) 

As illustrated above, some EA roots consist of three radicals, others 
consist of four, and still others consist of five. The first group is 
the largest, and the third is the smallest. 

*** Ht** *** 




EGYVnAN ARABIC 


239 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- S 


SCRIPT 


(1) Key to Literary Arabic graphic symbols and corresponding Egypticm 
Arabic symbols ; 


Literary Arabic Egyptian 


Literary ArcJsic 


1 

r 

» 


/ 


k 




? j, 

?aa jj 

aa j, 

" t 

' <-» 

u j 

an (finally) j 

in " J 

un " J 


kS 


E 

E 

C 

C 


aa 

b 

p (in foreign 
^ words) 

t or s 
9 

2 (in foreign 
^ words) 

X 



d 


d or z 


Egyptian 

t 

z or <j 
? 

Y 

f 

( V in foreign words ) 
? or q 
k 

1 or I 

m 

n 

h 

w 

u > uu > oo 

y 

i, i i r ee 
ay, ae 
a or h 

-t or -it or -a 



EGVmAN ARABIC 


240 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Literary Arabic Egyptian 


Literary Arabic Egyptian 


j 


r r 


z 


LT 

uF 


s 

1 

S 

d 


2^ (shadda) 
• (sukuun) 


doubling ©f conso- 

^ , nant 

absence of a 

vowel after a 

consonant 


(2) Numerals 

Examples of numerals and numerical uses : 


(a) ) Trio 

1 2 3 4 5 


(b) 

ot 



lA 


54 

16 

39 

48 

(c) 

YA-/ 

r/i 

)/o 

) 


78% 

3/4 

1/5 


(d) 

1 lYo 

) 1YT 

TTl 


1975 

1976 

234 


1 Y A 1 » • 
6 7 8 9 10 

Yo 

75 

\^ \/r IT 

112 1/3 42 

Yor MU 

753 1914 


*** *** *** 


SEMITIC 

A family of lauiguages constituting a branch of the Afro-Asiatic language 
stock. It includes Akkadian, Arabic, Ethiopic, Aramaic, Hebrew and Ugari- 
tic, which share certain common characteristics, e.g., a root (q.v.) and 
pattern (q.v.) structure, a set of derived verb forms, a set of back con¬ 
sonants /q,x, Y / f' / ^ /» a set of emphatic consonants (q.v.) / t » d / s» 3 /» 
a tense formed by prefixation and another by suffixation, grammatical 
gender, feminine formative /-t/, two-way plural noun formation : sound 
plural (q.v.) and broken plural (q.v.). 

The adjective "Semitic" was brought into use by A. L. Schlozer in 1781 
on the basis of Genesis X and XI. Before Schlozer, the Semitic languages 
were referred to as "Oriental languages". 




*** 


*** 



EGYVTIAN ARABIC 


241 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


SEMI-VOWEL 

A vowel-like sound which functions as a consonant : / w, y /. Also 
called "glide". 

*** itwa *** 

SENTENCE: EQUATIONAL 

( See : Phrase Versus Sentence ) 

*«* *** **• 


SENTENCE STRUCTURE 

The structure of EA sentences is presented below in outline form. It 
must be emphcisized that only the major patterns are dealt with, and that 
the treatment is not exhaustive. 

A sentence consists of a nucleus and optional adjuncts. 

I. A nucleus consists of am optional pre-verb, a subject and a predicate.. 
Pre-verbs are usually modals. In the following sentences, pre-verbs 
are underlined : 

l abudd ?al i yirga? ?abl 'Ali must return before sunset.' 

Imayr ib 

yimkin ?al i biyfiibb samlira 'Maybe Ali loves Samira.' 

It is usually possible for the pre-verb and the subject to exchange 
places.: 

?al i labudd yirga? ?abl 'Ali must return before sunset.-' 

Imayrib 

?al I yimkin biyfiibb samiira 'Maybe Ali loves Samira-' 

II. The subject may be a "minimxim subject” or an "expanded subject". The 
predicate may be a "minimum predicate or am "expcUided predicate". 

A. A mintmim subject is a noun or a noun replacer. The most co mmo n 
noun replacers are : 

1. Personal pronouns, e.g., huwwa , 'he'; hiyya 'she'; inta 'you 



EGyniAN ARABIC 


242 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


2 . fu laan 'so and so (ms) ' and fu laana 'so and so (fs) '. 

3. The indefinite forms waaFiid 'scmeone (m) ' and waftda 'scaneone (f) '. 
In the following sentences, minimvim subjects are underlined : 


zeenab mumarrida. 
i Imud Hr Tandu gt imaa9 
baTd saa?a. 
ana m in masr. 
ba7aalik usbuu? ?arfaani 
bikkalaaro ilfaarly da : 
fulaan raafi, wi flaana 
rig?it. wifina malna ? 

f i ih waaFiid biyis?al Tannak, 


'Zeinab is a nurse.' 

'The director has a meeting in 
an hour.' 

'I am from Egypt.' 

'For a week you have been making 
me sick with this nonsense : 
so and so went, so and so re¬ 
turned! What business is that 
of ours?' 

'There's someone asking for you.' 


B. An expanded siibject usually consists of a noun phrase. A noun 
phrase may be any of the following structures : 

Determiner + Noun 
Noun + Adjectival 
Determiner + Noun + Adjectival 

Determiners include quantifiers such as aktar , ay lab , muTzam ( all 
translatable by 'most' ) , gam 117 , kul I ( both translatable by 'all' ) , 
and ba?d 'srane'. An adjectival expression may be a demonstrative, 
an adjective, a prepositional phrase or a clause. A noun construct 
may be considered a sub-class of Noun + Adjectival since the second 
member of a noun construct qualifies the first ( notice that 
kitaab Yal I 'Ali's book' is equivalent to IIkitaab 11 I I l-?al I 
'the book \rfiich belongs to Ali' ). 

In the following examples, expanded subjects are underlined ; 


aktar talamz It I min masr . 

IIkitaab da bylbfias liwad? 

IsslyaasI fissudaan . 
Il?arablyya zzar?a bta?tl. 
Ittarabeeza III fmaktabi . 


'Most of my students are from Egypt. 
'This book discusses the political 
situation in the Sudan.' 

'The blue car is mine.' 

'The table in my office is old.' 


?ad I Ima, 




EGVVTIM ARABIC 


243 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


?arabivyiti tsaa? xamas 
tinfaar. 

il?ustaaz illi biydarrisni 
ttar i ix masr i. 


'My car is big enough for five 
people.' 

'The professor who teaches me 
history is Egyptian.' 


C. A minimum predicate toay be a noxin, an adjective, a verb, an ad¬ 
verb or a prepositional phrase. The verb may co-occur with at. 
least one closely associated element.. A closely associated ele¬ 
ment may be a direct object, an indirect object or a preposition 
which forms with the verb a close-knit expression. In other words, 
a minimum predicate may be any of the structures generated by 
the folllowing notation ( constituents which occur within paren¬ 
theses are optional; those which occur within braces are mutually 
exclusive ) : 


Verb (Direct Object) 


Preposition + Object 
Indirect Object 


) 


) 


In the following exeunples, minimum predicates are underlined ; 


?a I i t i Imi iz. 
fariida garniiI a . 
fiasan biyistahamma . 

?aIi daras iddars . 

saIma bitmuut fil?ays kriim . 

axuuya tatnminha ?ala bintaha . 

il?ustaaz fahhim far i id . 
iddars . 

i i farafi bukra . 
iI Iigtimaa? ba?d ilyada . 


'Ali is a student.' 

'Farida is pretty.' 

' Hasan is taking a bath.' 

'Ali studied the lesson.' 

'Salma loves ice cream.' 

'My brother reassured her in 
regard to her daughter.' 

'The professor explained the 
lesson to Farid.' 

' The wedding is tomorrow.' 

'The meeting is (going to be held) 
after lunch.' 


D. Expanded predicates correspond to minimum predicates : 

1. Corresponding to the minimum predicate which consists of a 

noun is an expanded predicate which consists of a noun phrase. 
In the following sentence, the predicate is a noun phrase : 
ittadxiin Taada mudirra . 'Smoking is a harmful habit.' 






EGVVrm ARABIC 


244 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


2. Corresponding to the minimum predicate which consists of an 
adjective is an expanded predicate which consists of an ad¬ 
jective and an expression of degree. Degree is usually ex¬ 
pressed by ; 

(a) An adverb, e.g., ?awi , qiddan , xaaIi s , all translatable 
by 'very*. 

(b) A stressed verbal noun whose root is the same as that of 
the adjective and which is followed by a rising teminal 
pitch. 

(c) A phrase consisting of the preposition I.!- 'to', the 
noun daraqa 'degree, extent*, and a modifier. 

In the following examples, the predicate contains an ex¬ 
pression of degree : 


iggamfa di kbiira ?awi . 


ilmudarrisa gamiiIa g;maaI . 

Ilmudarrisa garniila Idaraga 
tgannin . 


'This university is very large.' 

'The teacher (f) is so pretty.' 

'The teacher (f) is incredibly 
beautiful.' 


3. Corresponding to the minimum predicate which consists of an 
adjective is an expanded predicate which consists of a com¬ 
parative construction. The comparative construction may be 
modified by an expression of degree such as biktiir 'by far*. 
In the following examples, the predicate is a comparative 
construction : 


axuuya a?wa minni . 'My brother is stronger than I.' 

axuuya a?wa minni biktiir . 'My brother is much stronger thcui I. 

samya altar t ilmi iza . 'Samya is the smartest student.' 

4. Corresponding to the minimum predicate which consists of a 
verb ( with or without closely-related elements ) is an ex¬ 
panded predicate which consists of a verbal sequence. In the 
following example, the predicate is a verbal sequence.; 

uxti tfiibb tiigi tidris 'My sister would like to come 

to study English.' 


ing11i i z i ■ 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


245 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


5 . Corresponding to the minimum predicate which consists of a 
verb ( with or without closely-related elements ) is an ex¬ 
panded predicate consisting of a verb or a verbal sequence 
and a following adverbial. The adverbials here are : Type, 
Degree, Benefactive. Instrument, Source, Destination and Man¬ 
ner ( less frequent adverbials, such as Accompaniment, occur ). 

In the following examples, the predicate contains an adverbial ; 

'Ali suffered horrible pain.' 

'The professor became very angiry. 
' Hilmi bought a book for Sami.' 
'The man killed his wife with 
a knife.' 

'The American experts returned 
from Egypt.' 

'The university sent two pro¬ 
fessors to Iraq.' 

'The students returned fast.' 

The adverbials in question m^ co-occur. It would be unusual, 
however, to find more than three in any one sentence. Co¬ 
occurring adverbials are usually in the following order if 
they have the same structure : Type, Degree, Benefactive. 
Instrument, Source, Destination, Manner. 

ilSirka na?alit ilTizaal 'The company transported the 

l i?aI i billoor i min furnitiire for Ali by truck 

11qaah I ra I?aswaan . from Cairo to Aswan.' 

When two adjacent adverbials have the same structure, their 
positions may be reversed to indicate relative emphasis ( the 
adverbial to be emphasized is placed adiead of the other ). In 
addition, the positions may be reversed for the same purpose 
when one adverbial is a word and the other is a phrase. 

salma Itarit kitaab I i?a11 'Salma bought a book for Ali 
mi Imakta^ . from the bookshop.' 

'Salma bought a book from the 
bookshop for Ali.' 


?aIi t?alIim ?alam fazi IT . 
il?ustaaz zi?! I giddan . 
Fiilmi §tara ktaab I isaami . 
irraagil ?atal miraatu 
bisikkiina . 

ilxubara l?amrikaan riq?u 
min masr . 

iggam?a ba?atit ustazeen 
HI?iraa? . 

ittalamza rigTu bsurTa . 


salma Itarit kitaab 
miImaktaba Iitali. 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


246 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Il?us'taaz rig 19 m!n masr 
9ayyaan . 

il?ustaaz rigi? Tayyaan 
min masr . 


'The professor returned from 
Egypt in poor health.' 
'The professor returned, in 
poor health/ from Egypt.' 


An adverbial consisting of a clause usually follows one 
which consists of a word or a phrase. 


il?ustaaz rigiT min masr 'The professor returned from 

wFiaItu ssIfiRiyya Egypt in poor health.' 

mutadahwira . 

The adverbials in question differ from adjuncts in that the 
latter may introduce the sentence. 

(a) A type adverbial is typiccd.ly a noun phrase consisting of 
a) a verbal noxm vrtiose root is the same as that of the 
modified verb, and b) an adjectival expression. In the 
following examples, the type adverbial is imderlined r 


Tall naam noom Tam 1 1 ? . 'Ali slept soundly (liter¬ 

ally i Ali slept a sound sleep.)' 
Tall TaaS Tiiiit rafahiyya . 'Ali lived a life of luxury.' 

Adverbials other than those of type are typically pre¬ 
positional phrases. 

(b) A degree adverbial is often a prepositional phrase intro¬ 
duced by I idaraqa 'to an extent', or I idaragIt 1nn 'to the 
extent that' : 


ilmasriyylin yixtilfu Tan 
lITamrIkaan Iidaraqa 
k I b 11 ra . 

IsslnaaTa lyabaniyya 
ItFiassinit I idarag it 
inn amriika btistawrid 
1 ITarablyyaat mllyabaan 


'Egyptians differ from Ameri¬ 
cans to a great extent.' 

'Japanese industry has pro¬ 
gressed to the extent that 
America imports cars from 
Japan.' 


A degree adverbial may consist of the prepositional phrase 
11FaddIn ma - iI a Fadd i n ma 'to a certain extent' or the 




EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


247 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


prepositional phrase IIdaraqatin ma ila daraqatin ma 'to 
a certain extent'. 

isslnaa^a t?acldimit fi 'Industry has progressed in 

masr IIdaragatin ma / E^ypt to a certain extent.' 

11 a daragatin ma / 

I i Fiadd i n ma / i la 
fiaddin ma . 

Certciin adverbs may be used to express degree. The most 
common of these are ?awI , giddan , xaa11 s and kit iir ( all 
translatable by 'very, very much, a great deal' ), ta?r 1 Iban 
'nearly', and Siwayya 'a little, somewhat' : 

ll?ustaaz zl?II ?awl - "The professor was very angry.' 

masr lt?addlmlt ?awl . 'Egypt has progressed a great 

deal.' 

(c) A benefactive adverbial is usually a prepositional phrase 
introduced by the preposition I I - 'for'. If the object 
of the preposition is a pronoun, the prepositional phrase 
may be suffixed to the verb. 

suzaan iStarIt hidlyya 'Suzanne bought a gift for Ali' 

II Ta I I . 

suzaan iStarIt hidlyya 'Suzanne bought a gift for him.' 

11 ih. ~ suzaan iStarItlu 
hdlyya . 

When the preposition I I- is not suffixed, its vowel is 
lengthened before a pronominal object ; 111h 'for him', 

11 lha 'for her', I 11 hum 'for them', 111k 'for you (ms)', 

111kl 'for you (fs), I 11kum 'for you (p)', I I Ina 'for us'. 

The form I lyya 'for me' is an exception, 

When suffixed to a verb, the preposition 1 I- assumes 
the form -I- . Sometimes a sequence of more than two con¬ 
sonants results from adding to the verb a prepositional 
phrase consisting of -I- and a pronominal ending. In 



EGyPTlM ARABIC 


248 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


such cases, a vowel is inserted between the second and 
the third consonants. Uiat vowel is /u/ before -hum 
or -kum, /a/ before -ha , and /i/ otheirwise. 

iStara + -I- + -na = lltaralna 'he bought for us' 
iStarit + -1- + -hum = I^tarit luhum 'she bought for them' 
iStarlt + -I- + -kum = iltaritiukum 'she bought for you (p)' 
iltarlt + -1- + -ha = i^taritlaha 'she bought for her' 
iStarit + -1- + -na = iStaritlina 'she bought for us' 

?add + -I- + -I = TaddlII 'he counted for me' 

Tadd + -I- + -hum = Taddiihum 'he counted for them' 

?add + -1- + -kum = Taddilkum 'he counted for you (p)' 

Cgdld ^ + “hs “ ^sdd! Ihs coun'bsd fOT iissr* 

?add + -i- + -na = Taddilna 'he counted for us' 


A prepositional phrase with Ii- may be an indirect ob¬ 
ject of the preceding verb or a benefactive adverbial. 

In sentence (i) below, the underlined phrase is an in¬ 
direct object; in sentence (ii), a benefactive adverbial j 

(i) fallimt iddars Ifariid . 'I taught the lesson to 

Farid.' 

(ii) iStareet hidiyya Ifariid . 'I bought a gift for Farid.' 

Notice, however, that the first sentence may occur with- 
out Ii- ( in which case fariid occurs before iddars ). 

Such a possibility does not exist for the second sentence. 
Notice also that fari id can become the subject if sentence 
(i) is made passive, but not if sentence (ii) is made pas¬ 
sive. 


?a11imt fariid iddars . 
but not 

*iStareet fariid hidiyya 

fariid it^allim iddars . 
but not 

*fariid I tiara hdiyya 


'I taught the lesson to 
Farid.' 

'The lesson weis taught to 
Feurid. ' 


(d) An adverbial of instrument is usually a prepositional 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


249 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


phrase introduced by the preposition bi- 'by, with'. 
Less frequently, the phrase is introduced by b i wast 11 


'by means of or ?an tari i? 

irraagil da 731 a 1 miraatu 
bisikkiina . 

iSSirka btun?ul ilbatrool 
blwastlt issufun . 
ilfiukuuma fiazzarit i^la?b 
Tan tart I? Il?lzaa?a . 

(e) An adverbial of source is 
introduced by min 'from'. 

uxti Star It llhidiyya 
ml I mafia I I da . 


' through j by way of. 

"Hiis man killed his wife 
with a knife.' 

'The con?)any transports oil 
by means of ships.' 

'The government warned the 
people through (use of) 
the radio.' 

usually a prepositional phraise 

'My sister bought the gift 
from this shop.' 


(f) An adverbial of destination is usually a prepositional 
phrase introduced by Ii- 'to' : 

ibni byimSi mi I beet son walks from home to 

I 1Imadrasa kuI I yoom . school every day.' 

If the adverbial of destination slot is iinmediately 
after one of certain verbs, the preposition is usueilly 
(, though not necessarily ) deleted. The verbs in question 
include raafS 'to go', 3 a 'to come', rigi? 'to return', 
till? 'to ascend, to go up', saafir 'to travel' : 

?al i raafi (I) i Imadrasa . 'Ali went to school.' 

?ali raaR ma?a saami 'Ali went with Sami to school 

(I)iImadrasa . 

(g) A manner adverbial is often a prepositioneil phrase intro¬ 
duced by the preposition bi- 'with' t 

fariida btiz?al bisur?a . 'Farida gets upset easily 

(literailly! 'with speed') 


A manner adverbial may also be a word or a clause : 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


250 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


iImanduub till? 

ml I I igtimaa? yadbaan . 
matza??a?l kida . 

IImanduub xarag 
mi I 1Igtimaa? wi huwwa 
blysibb wylI9an . 


"The delegate left the meet¬ 
ing angry.' 

'Don't shout this way.' 

'The delegate left the meet¬ 
ing swearing and cursing.' 


6 . The predicate may be a clause consisting of a subject and a 
predicate i 


a) tali abuuh naqqaar . 


b) masr igtisadha t?addim . 


c) I ay I a axuuha rigi? min 
aswaan bittayyaara . 


'Ali's father is a carpenter (lit¬ 
erally: 'Mi his father is a 
carpenter.') i' 

'Egypt's economy has progressed 
(literally: 'Egypt its economy 
has progressed.').' 

'Leila's brother returned from 
Aswan by plane (literally: 

'Leila her brother returned from 
Aswan by plane.').' 


Sentences such as the above are derived from structurally 
simpler sentences. Thus sentence (a) is derived from abu 
tali naqgaar 'Ali's father is a carpenter.'. Likewise, 
sentence (b) is derived from igtisaad masr it?addim 'Egypt's 
economy has progressed,' Notice that the derivation is ac¬ 
complished by (a) transposing a noun from sentence-medial 
position, and (b) supplying a pronoun to occupy the position 
previously occupied by the transposed noun. Notice too that 
the supplied pronoun refers to the transposed noun and agrees 
with it. 

III. An adjmct is a constituent ^diich can occur before or after the 
nucleus and which modifies the entire nucleus. In the following 
exasples, the adjunct is underlined. The nucleus is the rest of the 
sentence : 


innaas malyuliin hina . 


'People are busy here.' 




EGyPTUtJ ARABIC 


251 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


hina nnaas malyu1iin • 

Rarga? masr I aitima t i nt i h i 
ssana ddlraslyya . 
lamma tint I hi ssana ddiraslyya 
Rarga? masr . 


'Here people are busy.' 

'I will return to Egypt when the 
school year ends.' 

'When the school year ends, I 
will return to Egypt.' 


IV. Adjuncts include expressions of place, tine, condition, piirpose and 
reason . In regard to structure, an adjunct may be a word, a phrase, 
or a clause. In the following sentences, the adjuncts are underlined ; 


hlnaak ilfuluus ahamm min 
iImabaadi? . 

bu kra Ranzuur i I mat Rat . 
iza ImaSruu? da faSal Ranixsar 
fuluus kitiir . 

IlRukuuma ban it ilmasaani? 

litaRslin IIwad? Ilqtisaadi • 
baruuR masr kuI I seef ?alaan 
Tilt i h i naa k . 


'Over there, money is more im¬ 
portant than principle.' 

'Tomorrow we will visit the museum.' 

'If this project fails, we will 
lose a lot of money.' 

'The government built factories 

to improve the economic situation. 

'I go to Egypt every summer because 
my family is there.' 

they are usually in the following 

if all are words, phrases. 
Reals on. 


When two or more adjuncts co-occur 
order if they have the same structure ( i.e,, 
or clauses ) : Place, Time, Condition, Purpose 


iiRaala Iiqt1saad1yya wiRSa 
flubnaan fiIwa?t iIRaaIi 
bsabab ilRarb il?ahliyya . 


'The economic situation is bad in 
Lebanon at the present time 
because of the civil war.' 


When two adjacent adjuncts have the same structure, their positions 
may be reversed to indicate relative emphasis { the adjunct to be 
eii 5 )hcisized is placed ahead of the other ) : 


ilRaala Iiqtisaadiyya wiRia 
flubnaan f11wa?t iIRaaIi . 
i 1Raala I iqt 1 saadiyya wiRSa 
f11wa?t 11RaaIi flubnaan . 


'The economic situation is bad in 
Lebanon at the present time.* 
'The economic situation is bad at 
the present time in Lebanon,' 


If different in structure, co-occurrent adjuncts are arranged in ac¬ 
cordance with the following rule : a word precedes a phrase, suid a 
phrase precedes a clause. 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


252 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Fiaraklt ilmuruur Batkuun wiFiSa 
bukra bsabab ilmuzahra . 
Fiarakit ilmuruur fiatkuun wiFi^a 
bsabab Ilmuzahra lairnna nirqa? 
mllmadrasa. 


'The traffic will be bad tomorrow 
because of the strike.' 

The traffic will be bad, because 
of the strike, when we return 
from school.' 


V. Discussed under the appropriate headings are the transformations which 
change sentences from statements to questions or commands, from active 
to passive, from affirmative to negative, and from ccmi^lete to ellip¬ 
tic. Also discussed in detail under the appropriate headings are the 
processes of embedding and conjoining. 


4r*4r itirit *** 


SEPARATION : PRONOUN OF 

( See : Pronoun of Separation ) 

*** *** *** 


SEQUENCE OF VERBS 

In the sentence kunt baFiaawl I azaa 
Arabic', there is a sequence of three 
Egyptian Arabic. Exan^jlas ; 

tifilbb tllrab ?ahwa m?aaya ? 
tlFiibb truufi niSuuf haanl ? 
Fiayruufi yldxul ylnaam. 
ruufi naam 1 

yaUa nruufi niSrab ?ahwa. 
yajla ruuFi naam 


:ir Tarabi 'I was trying to study 
verbs. This is not unusual for 

'Would you likedto drink coffee with me?' 
'Would you like to go and see Hani?' 

'He will go enter in order to sleep.' 

'Go and sleep!' 

'Let's go and drink coffee.' 

'Go and sleep.' 


*** 




*** 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


253 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


SHORTENING OF VOWELS 

( See ; Vowels : contraction; Vowels ; Shortening of Long Vowels ) 

*** *** it** 


SHORT VOWELS 

( See : Vowels ) 


^eit* itit* Utit* 


SLOT 


The position that a word ( or phrase ) occupies in a frame or pattern; 
the significant position or positions which a word ( or phrase ) occupies 
with respect to other elements in a sequence. 

Adjective Noim 

English a big boy 

EA walad kibiir 'a big boy' 

Note in the above examples the Adjective and Noun slots. In the English ; 
the adjective slot precedes the noun slot whereas in EA the noun slot 
precedes the adjective slot. 


it*1t itltit 


STEM 


A stem is a root (q.v.) in combination with a pattern (q,v,), to which 
inflections (q,v.) cure added. 




*** 


*it* 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


254 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


STOP 


Refers to consonants characterized by a conplete 
passcige, thus blocking the air stream momentarily, 
lips in production of /b/. EA stops are /p, b, t, 


closure of the air 
e.g,, closing of both 
9 ' 9 # • 


ifkit icitit Ititit 


STRESS 


Each EA word has one primary { i.e., relatively more prominent ) stress. 

The domain of primary stress is almost totally predictable in terms of 
syllable structure. 

Primary stress is most frequently on the pentilt ( i.e., pre-final syl¬ 
lable ), e.g., V[ktfbu 'they write', madrasa 'school'. However, in cer¬ 
tain cases, primary stress occurs on the ultima ( i.e., the final syllable ), 
and in other Ccises it occurs on the antepenult ( i.e., the third syllable 
from the end ), 

The ultima is stressed if (a) it contains a long vowel or if (b) it 
ends in two consonants, e.g., katabuu 'they wrote it', katabt 'I wrote'. 

The antepenult is stressed if the last three syllables have the structure 
CVCVCV{C), e.g., Sabaka 'a net', katabit 'she wrote', Inkasarit 'it broke', 
muxtalifa 'different Cfs)'. 

Contrary to the above rules, primary stress is on the penult if the 
structure CVCVCV(C) constitutes a feminine singular perfect-tense verb 
\diose final V(C) is a pronoun suffix, e.g., ramftu 'she threw it away'. 

Again, primary stress is usually on the penult if the structure CVCVCVCCj 
constitutes a broken pliiral form with identical high vowels in the first 
two syllables, e.g., sibfta 'baskets', numura 'tigers'. 

Note : The long vowel of the word-final syllable CW(0 is shortened 
^en its pronunciation in close association with a following word would 
result in _WCC. In this context, shortening does not alter the place¬ 
ment of primary stress : 


banaa 

bana mbaarift 


'he built it' 

'he built it yesterday 



EGyPTlAN ARABIC 


255 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


marf I d 

marfd xaalis 

• • * 

*** •kitit *** 


' sick' 

'veiry sick' 


SUFFIX 

A formative ( a single phoneme, syllable or syllables ) added at the 
end of a word to modify its meaning or derive a new word, e.g. s 

walad 'boy' walad een 'two boys'; 

katab 'to write' katabna 'we wrote' 

( See also ; Pronoun : Suffixes with Auxiliaries? Pronoun : Suffixes 
with Particles? Pronoun : Personal? Possession ) 

*** *** *** 


SUFFIX ; /-a/ — CHANGE IN FORM TO /-it/ 

A feminine noun ending in /-a/ has a special form for the construct state 
the /-a/ drops euid /-it/ is added. 

madiina 'city' madiinit tanta 'the city of Tanta' 


*** *** *** 

S/LLABLES 

a) In EA syllables have the following structures ? 

cv, cvc, cw, cwc#, cvcc# 

( C = consonant? V = vowel? -# = final ) 

b) Syllables do not begin with vowdls? they always begin with C C ?V, CV ). 

c) The sequence /WCC/ does not occur within a single word? thus long 
vowels are only followed by a single consonant in a word, 

d) Syllables with the structures /CWC#/ or /CVCC#/ occur only stressed. 

e) Thus, we might summarize as follows ; 

- Every syllable begins with /C/. 


EGWTIAN ARABIC 


256 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


- Every syllable has /V/ or /W/. 

- Syllables may be open or closed ( an open syllable is a syllable 
that ends in a vowel; a closed syllable is a syllable that ends in 
a consonant ), 

- No closed syllable has the structure /WCC/, but rather /CWC#/ or 
/CVCC V. 

* ** *it1t ifkit 




EGyPUAN ARABIC 


257 


reference grammar 


- T - 


TAP 

Refers to the articulatory process by which the tip of the tongue makes 
a single rapid contact agednst the alveolar ridge producing a consonant : 
/r, r/. 

Mr* *** *** 

TENSENESS 

A tense { also fortis ) consonant in general is produced with more force 
that its lax C also lenis ) counterpart. Tense here refers to two inden- 
tical consonants with no intervening vowel pronounced with stronger arti¬ 
culation and greater tension on the muscles of the articulator euid, 
usually, aspiration. Lax refers to a single consonant pronounced with 
lesser muscle tension and weaker, laxer articulation, 

A tense consonant ( also known as gemminate ) has precisely twice the 
duration of a single (lax) consonant, e,g, « 

katab 'to write' 

kattib 'to cause to write' 

M* *** *** 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


258 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


TRILITERAL ROOTS : TYPES 

A triliteral root is one which consists of three radicals. There are 
two types of such roots ; sound and weak. 

A sound root is one vAiich consists entirely of somd radicals ( e.g,, 
drs, ktb , Yrf , dxl ) . A weak root is one vAiich does not consist entirely 
of sound radicals C See : Radicals : Types ) , 

Weak roots fall into three subtypes s the assimilated, the hollow and 
the defective : 

1. An assimilated root is one whose first radical is weak, e.g. , wsI . 

In verbs of Measure VTII, the initial weak radical is totally assimilated 
to the following /t/. Thus ws! combines vjith iFtaSaL to produce ittasa! 
rather than the expected * iwtasaI . This assimilation gives the root its 
name. 

2. A hollow root is one whose medial radical is weak, e.g., nwm , yyb . 

3. A defective root is one vdiose final radical is weak, e.g. , d?w , rmy . 


*** 


*** 


it 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


259 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- U ~ 


UNIT NOUNS 

{ See ; Collective Nouns ) 


mt it it *it it 


UVULAR 


The uvula is the small appendage that hangs down from the very edge of 
the velum. Ovular refers to a place of articulation consisting of the 
tongue dorsum and the uvula : /q/. 


*** 


it** 


*** 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


261 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


r 1/ - 


VELAR 


A place of articulation consisting of the tongue dorsum and the back of 
the palate : /k, g/. 


ifkit **★ *★* 


l/ELUM 


The area behind the hard palate, cilso called the soft palate. 

*** *** 

VERB t AGREEMENT WITH THE SUBJECT 

Verbs agree with the subject in number, gender 'and person. Perfect forms 
are marked for such agreement by suffixes only; some imperfect forms are 
marked by prefixes only, vdiile others are marked by both prefixes and 
suffixes. 

The set of affixes marking agreement with various subjects is the same 
for verbs of all types; however, the addition of those affixes requires 
certain changes in some stems, 

Ca) The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes to the 
sound stems katab 'to write' ( perfect form ) and yiktIb ( imperfect form ) . 


The affixes are set off by hyphens 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


262 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

katab 

y 1 -kt i b 

Chlyya) 

katab-it 

t i -kt i b 

(humma) 

katab-u 

yi-ktib-u 

(,i nta) 

katab-t 

ti-ktib 

(i nt I). 

katab-t1 

1 

cr 

1 

(.1 ntui 

katab-tu 

ti-ktib-u 

(ana) 

katab-t 

a-ktib 

Ci 6na) 

katab-na 

nl-ktlb 


Most of the imperfect forms listed above contain /i/ in the prefix. If 
the second syllable of the imperfect form contains /u/ or /uu/, the /I/ 
is interchangeable with /u/, e.g. , yixruq yuxruq 'to exit', yiruufi 
yuruuFi ' to go', 

(b) Lest a cluster of three consonants result, /ee/ is inserted between 
the last radical of a doubled perfect stem and a suffix ^diich begins with 
or consists of a consonant. The following forms result from adding the 
agreement affixes to Tadd 'to count' ( perfect form ) and yi^idd (imper¬ 
fect form ). ( ?add is a doubled stem. ) 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

Tadd 

yi-?idd 

thlyya) 

?add-it 

ti-Tidd 

(hutnrna) 

?add-u 

yi-Tidd-u 

ttnta) 

?addee-t 

ti-?Idd 

CintI) 

Caddee-tI 

ti-?idd-l 

tlntu) 

?addee-tu 

ti-?idd-u 

(anal 

9addee-t 

a-Tidd 

(I6na) 

?addee-na 

ni-?idd 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


263 


REFERENCE GRAMMA!? 


The long vowel /ee/ is also inserted between the last radical of a 
Measure IX perfect stem and a suffix which begins with ar consists of a 
consonant. The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes 
to 1swadd ’to turn black' (perfect form ) and yiswadd ( imperfect form ). 



Perfect 

IiiSjerfect 

(huwwai 

iswadd 

yi-swadd 

(hiyya) 

iswadd-it 

ti-swadd 

(hummal 

I swadd-u 

yi-swadd-u 

(inta). 

iswaddee-t 

ti-swadd 

(Jntll 

iswaddee-t1 

ti-swadd-i 

(Intul 

iswaddee-tu 

ti-swadd-u 

(ana) 

iswaddee-t 

a-swadd 

(.i final 

iswaddee-na 

ni-swadd 


Cd Upon the addition of a suffix which begins with or consists of a 
consonant, the long vowel of FaaL is replaced by a short vowel ( in EA, 
a long vowel does not normally occur before two consonants ). The short 
vowel in question is /u/ if the imperfect stem has /uu/; otherwise the 
short vowel is /!/, 

The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes to raah 


i' ( perfect form ) 

and yiruuh 

( inperfect form ), 


Perfect 

Imperfect 

huwwa 

raafi 

y i -ruuFi 

hiyya 

raaFi-i t 

t i-ruuFi 

humma 

raali-u 

9 

yi-ruuh-u 

i nta 

rufi-t 

t i-ruuFi 

int i 

ru h-t i 

ti-ruufi-i 

i ntu 

rufi-t u 

t i-ruufi-u 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


264 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Perfect 


Imperfect 


(ana) rufi-t a-ruuFi 

(Ifina) rufi-na nl-ruuft 


The following forms restilt from adding the agreement affixes to gaab 
'to bring' { perfect form ) and yigi ib ( inperfect form ). 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

.(huwwal 

gaab 

yi-g i i b 

(hlyya) 

gaab-it 

ti-gi i b 

(humma) 

gaab-u 

y i -g i I b-u 

(fnta) 

gib--t 

ti-g i i b 

(Inti) 

gib-t i 

tI-g1ib-l 

(intu) 

gib-tu 

11 -g i i b-u 

(ana) 

gib-t 

a-giib 

(1ftna) 

gib-na 

ni-g I i b 


The following forms result from adding the aggreement affixes to naam 
' to sleep' ( perfect form ) and yinaam ( imperfect form ). 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

naam 

yi-naam 

(hlyya) 

naam-it 

ti-naam 

(humma) 

naam-u 

yi-naam-u 

(inta) 

n im-t 

ti-naam 

(Inti) 

nim-t I 

ti-naam-i 

(Intu) 

nim-t u 

ti-naam-u 

(ana) 

nim-t 

a-naam 

(IRna) 

nim-na 

ni-naam 




EGyPTJM ARABIC 


265 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The vowel replacement rule given above is restricted to Measure I of 
hollow verbs; elsewhere, a long vowel is replaced by its short counter¬ 
part before two consonants. The following forms resvilt from adding the 
agreement suffixes to azaaI 'to remove' and istagaab 'to respond' : 


(huwwa) 

azaa 1 

istagaab 

(hiyya) 

azaa1-it 

istagaab-it 

(humma) 

azaa1-u 

istagaab-u 

(inta) 

azal-t 

istagab-t 

(inti) 

aza1-t i 

istagab-ti 

(intu) 

aza1-tu 

istagab-tu 

(ana) 

aza1-t 

i stagab-t 

(iBna) 

azal-na 

istagab-na 

(d) Upon the addition of a suffix beginning 

with or consisting of a 

vowel, the final vowel 

of a defective stem is 

deleted; upon the addition 

of a suffix beginning 

with or consisting of a 

consonaint, the final vowel 

of a defective stem is 

replaced by /ee/. 


The following forms 

result from adding the agreement affixes to bana 

'to build' ( perfect form ) and yibni ( imperfect form ). 


Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

bana 

yi-bni 

(hiyya) 

ban-it 

t i -bni 

(humma) 

ban-u 

yi-bn-u 

(inta) 

banee-t 

ti-bni 

(inti) 

banee-ti 

ti-bn-i 

(intu) 

banee-tu 

ti-bn-u 

(ana) 

banee-t 

a-bni 

(ihna) 

banee-na 

ni-bni 


EGVTTIM ARABIC 


266 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes to nisi 
'to forget' ( perfect form ) and yinsa ( in$)erfect form ). 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

nisi 

y i-nsa 

(hiyya) 

nis-it 

ti-nsa 

(humma) 

ni s-u 

yi-ns-u 

(inta) 

nisee-t 

ti-nsa 

(inti) 

nisee-ti 

ti-ns-i 

(intu) 

nisee-tu 

ti-ns-u 

(ana) 

nisee-t 

a-nsa 

(ifina) 

nisee-na 

ni-nsa 


If the final vowel of the perfect defective is /i/, it may be replaced 
/y/ ( rather than being deleted ) before a suffix which begins with or 
consists of a vowel. Before a suffix which begins with or consists of a 
consonant, the /i/ in question may be lengthened ( rather than being 
replaced by /ee/ ) : 


(huwwa) 

nisi 

(hiyya) 

nisy-it 

(humma) 

nisy-u 

(inta) 

n i s i i -t 

(inti) 

n i s ii-t i 

(intu) 

n i s i i -t u 

(ana) 

n i sii-t 

(i fina) 

nisii-na 


The addition of agreement affixes to quadriliteral verbs involves no 
new principles. 


EGVVTJAN ARABIC 


267 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes to dahraq 
'to roll' { perfect form ) and yi da Brag ( imperfect form ). 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

daftrag 

yi-dafirag 

(hiyya) 

daFirag-it 

ti-daFirag 

(humma) 

dafirag-u 

y i-daFirag-u 

(inta) 

dafirag-t 

ti-dahrag 

(i nt i) 

daf>rag-t i 

t i -daFirag-i 

(intu) 

dafirag-tu 

t i -daFirag-u 

(ana) 

dafirag-t 

a-daFirag 

(i fina) 

dafirag-na 

n i -dafirag 


The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes to itina?ann 
'to be reassured' ( perfect form ) and yitma?inn ( imperfect form ). 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

itma?ann 

yi-tma?inn 

(hiyya) 

itma?ann-it 

ti-tma?inn 

(humma) 

itma?ann-u 

yi-tma?inn-u 

(inta) 

itma?annee-t 

ti-tma?inn 

(inti) 

itma?annee-ti 

ti-tma?inn-i 

(i ntu) 

itma?annee-tu 

ti-tma?inn-u 

(ana) 

itma?annee-t 

a-tma?inn 

(ifina) 

itma?annee-na 

ni-tma?inn 


The following forms result from adding the agreement affixes to itbahd i I 
'to be treated contemptuously' ( perfect form ) and yitbahdi I ( imperfect 
form ). 




EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


268 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

(huwwa) 

itbahdi1 

yi-tbahdi1 

(hiyya) 

itbahdil-it 

t i-tbahdi1 

(humroa) 

itbahdil-u 

t i-tbahdi1 

(inta) 

itbahdiI-t 

ti-tbahd i 1 

(i nt i) 

itbahdiI-ti 

ti-tbahdii-i 

(intu) 

itbahdil-tu 

ti-tbahdil-u 

(ana) 

itbahdiI-t 

a-tbahd i 1 

(ifina) 

itbahdi1-na 

ni-tbahd i 1 


*** it** *** 

l/ERB : ASPECT 


-ha and bi- are added to imperfect verb forros to 


•He will return tomorrow.* 


( mainly stative verbs and verbs which indicate 

bi- indicates habitual or repetitive 


The prefixes ha- f 
indicate aspect. 

The prefix fia- designates the future 

fiayirga? bukra. 

With certain verbs 
change or fixation of location ) 
occurence : 

biyifham bis?uuba. 
biyruufi masr fisseef. 
biyuskun ma?aana lamma 
yizuur masr. 


'He comprehends with difficulty.' 
'He goes to Egypt in the summer.' 
'He stays with us when he visits 
Egypt.' 


With all other verbs, bi- may designate either continuity or repetitive¬ 
ness ( "continuity" being viewed as the feature of an action or an event 
in progress ) : 


uxti btidris dilwa?ti. 
uxti btidris biIleel. 


'My sister is studying now.' 
'My sister studies at night.' 


EGypTIAN ARABIC 


269 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Stative verbs should not be confused with verbs that indicate change 
of state. The latter designate a perceptible process leading from one 
state to another, while the former designate a state without focussing 
on a process. The following exanples may help in differentiating stative 
verbs from verbs which indicate change of state ; 

1. Stative ; biyyi ib *he is (usually) absent', biyi fidar 'he is (usually) 
present', biyi ?raf 'he (usually) knows'. 

2. Change of state ; biyitftaggar 'it (m) is getting/gets petrified', 
biyitgammid 'it (m) is solidifying/solidifies', b i yi fiIaww 'he is getting/ 
gets to be good-looking', biyduub 'it (m) is dissolving/dissolves', 
biyinsihir 'it (m) is melting/usually melts'. 

With verbs that indicate change of state, bi- denotes either continuity 
or repetitiveness. 

In most cases, the absence of an aspect prefix on an imperfect verb 
form indicates possibility as opposed to fact ( see : Verbs : Subjtinc- 
tive ) : 

laazim yiigi. 'He must come.' 

tiigi mafaana ? 'Would you like to come with us?' 

There are, however, a few contexts where absence of the aspect prefix does 
not indicate possibility; for example, the underlined verb in the following 
sentence has no aspect prefix due to a process of deletion which is moti¬ 
vated by redundancy ; 

fianfiaarib wi fianintisir. —4 'We will fight and we will win.' 

Fianfiaarib wi nintisir. 


*** *** *** 


l/ERB : AUXILIARIES 

A "verbal sequence" consists of two or more verbs occurring in immediate 
succession. According to this definition, the first of the following ex¬ 
pressions is a verbal sequence, but the second is not ( since the two 
verbs are separated by a pronominal suffix ) ; 




EGmiM ARABIC 


270 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


(1) Fiayxaaf yrtkalllm. 'He will be afraid to talk,' 

(2) Suftu bylktib, 'I saw him writing.' 

In a verbeOL sequence the last verb is called the main verb, and the 
rest are called auxiliaries . A verbal sequence may include as many as six 
verbs ; 

kaan yifilbb ylbtidl yruuFi 'He would have liked to start 

yItTal IIm yF?ra, going to learn how to read,' 

As may be expected, verbal sequences as long as the one above rarely 
occur; it is still true, however, that such sequences are possible. 

Verbal sequences in EA are characterized by two syntactic features. 

ClI The main verb may be replaced by any other verb. On the other 
hand, each of the auxilieuries is replaceable by a limited number of verbs 

(2) The auxiliaries occur in a fixed order; thus while the first se¬ 
quence below is grammatical, the second is not » 

yitmanna yruuFi yIdris 'He would love to go to study.' 

*yIruuFi yitmanna yidris 

The following chart includes some auxiliaries which are common in Egypt 
ian Arabic, The avixiliaries are listed as classes, and the classes are 
arranged according to relative position. The verb kaan is excluded from 
the cheurt since it requires special considerations. 








EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


272 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Any one or combination of the above auxiliary classes may be deleted 


from the verbal sequence ! 

ylfaddal yibtidi yFtTalllm 
ylktib. 

ylfaddal yit?alIim yiktib, 
Fiayitfal I Im ylktib. 


•He would prefer to start learn¬ 
ing how to write.' 

'He would prefer to leaum how to 
write.' 

' He will learn how to write.' 


Each member of a given class may co-occ\ir ( in a verbal sequence ) with 
some member of every other class. However, it would be incorrect to 
assume that members can be selected at random from veirious classes and 
strung together into a verbal sequence ( semantic, rather tham formal, 
restrictions preclude this possibility ), 

Three classes of auxiliaries are worthy of special notice t those 
are Class I, Class II, and Class III i 

1. Class I auxiliaries have two distinctive characteristics i 

(a) The subject of a Class I auxiliary may differ from the subject 
of the main verb. In contrast, the subject of a Class II, Class III or 
Class IV auxiliary is always the same as the subject of the main verb. 

yIfilbb yibtidi yidris. 'He would like to start studying,' 

afilbb yibtidi yidris. 'I would like him to start studying. 

(b) Class 1 auxiliaries usually express wish, desire, fear, intention, 
pre ference, etc, 

(c) When they occur without an aspect prefix. Class I auxiliaries 
usually imply some provision or condition> thus this usage corresponds 
to the English conditional "would". 

biyfilbb yzurna, 'He likes visiting us.' 

yihlbb yzurna, 'He would like to visit us (if 

possible, if given a choice, etc.) 


2, Class II auxiliaries usually indicate progress ( or lack of progress ) 
in the direction of an action, 

3. Class III auxiliaries h^we three distinctive characteristics ! 

(a) A Class III auxiliary, if it begins a verb sequence, and a fol- 




EGVPTIM ARABIC 


273 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


lowing verb may both be perfect, inperfect or imperative. Additionally 
the Class III verb may be perfect and followed by an inperfect verb, A 
third verb in the sequence is always imperfect. 


raafi daras, 
blyruufi yidris, 
ruuFi Idris, 
raafi yIdris, 

raafi yltYalI in yi?ra, 
blypuufi ylt^allim yl?ra. 
ruufi it?alIim t i?ra. 
raafi yit?aI IIm yl?ra. 


'He went and studied,' 

'He goes to study,' 

' Go and study.' 

'He went to study,' 

'He went and' learned how to read 
'He goes to learn how to read, ' 
'Go and learn how to read.' 

'He went to learn how to read. ' 


The situation is different in a verbal sequence whose first constituent 
is not a Class III auxiliary i in such a sequence, only the first verb 
may be perfect or iaperativej every other verb in the sequence must be 
inperfect. 


xaaf ylruufi yi?abilha. 
blyxaaf ylruufi yl?abilha. 

xaaf tiruufi ti?abilha. 


'He was afrciid to go to meet her, 
'He is (usually) afraid to go to 
meet her.' 

'Be afraid to go to meet her,' 


(b) A Class III auxiliary which introduces a verbal sequence may be 
followed by a conjunction. 

•till? Istafiamma-or 'He went up and took a bath.' 

tiI IT wIstafiamma. 

It la? i stafiamma or 'Go up and take a bath,' 

It la? wlstafiamma. 


till? yIstafiamma or 'He went up to take a bath.' 

till? ?aSaan yIstafiamma, 

fiayltia? yistafiamma or 'He will go up to take a bath. ' 

fiayitia? ?aiaan yistafiamma. 

Notice that the optioned, conjiinction is usually ?alaan 'in order to' 
when the second verb is inperfeetj otherwise, the optional conjunction 
is usually wl 'and'. 




EGVTTIAW ARABIC 


274 


RETERENCE GRAMMAR 


(c) Auxiliaries of Cleiss III are mostly forms which designate motion. 
Some of these atjxiliaries, expecially y i?uuni , may co-occur with other 
auxiliaries of the same class. 

ylfilbb y?uum yuxrug yllimm 'He would like to get up and go 

llhawa, out to get some fresh air.' 

Aspect prefixes can be attached only to the first form of a verbal 
sequence. Absence of those prefixes designates the subjunctive. 

Fiayxaaf ylruuR yl?aabil 'will he be afraid to go to meet 

llmudllr ? the director ?' 

yixaaf yiruuFi yl?aabil llmudiir.? 'Do you suppose he would be afraid 

to go to meet the director?' 

The form kaan 'was' ( iB?)erfect i yll<uun ) may, under certain condi¬ 
tions, precede any of the verbal sequences described above to mark tense, 
aspect, or the subjunctive ( see Verbs i The Marker kaan ) t 

biyruufi yl?abiiha. 'He goes to see her.' 

kaan blyruuR yi?abilha, 'He used to go to see her,' 

yikuun biyruufi yi?abilha ? 'Could it be that he goes to see 

her.' 


Notes : 

1, Verbal sequences are derived C through an optional transformation ) 
from source strings where the verb forms do not follow each other in im¬ 
mediate succession. The following statements hold true in those strings t 
(a) Class 1, Class II and Class IV auxiliaries are usually followed 
by an expression consisting of a nominalizer and a following subject t 

yifaddal innu yibtidl , . . 
yifiaawii innu yi igi , . . 
yit?al I im innu yi kt i b . . . 

Cb} Class III auxiliaries are usually followed by a conjunction s 

yiigi ?a§aan yitTalIim , . . 
raafi w-it?alIim . , . 


In the underlying string, as in the derived one, only an initial inperfect 




EGmUN ARABIC 


275 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


form has the option of occurring with an aspect prefix, 

2. In a given verbal sequence, the first verb may be replaced by the 
active participle; this fact accounts for the following sentences j 


Talf ?aasld yiruuF yl^tayal, 

?al i tniS ?aarlf ylbsit 
1Imud11r, 

Tali raayifi yizurhum. 

Tall mltTawwId ylsfia badri, 

Mr* *** 


'Ali intends to go to work.' 

'Ali does not know how to please 
the director.' 

'Ali is on his way to visit them,' 
'Ali is accustomed to waking up 
early,' 

*** 


l/ERB : BARE FORM 


A "bare form" is an imperfect verb occurring with no aspect prefix, e.g,, 
yidris ( in contrast with biyidris and fiayidris ). 

The bare form usually indicates subjunctive meaning and results from 
deleting a red\indant aspect prefix. In the following sentence,' nint i s i r 
is bare as a result of deleting the redundant prefix Fa- ; the absence 
of Fa- here does not denote s\ibjunctive meaning i 

Fanfiaarib wi nintisir, 'We will fight and win.' 

* ** * «* * 


l/ERB ! CITATION FORM: 


Verb stems in EA take affixes which indicate agreement with the subject. 
Consequently, the verb form differs with different subjects : 


(. huwwa, )daras 
C hiyya )darasit 
Cinta )darast 
etc. 

C huwwa )b-yidris 


'he studied' 

'she studied' 

' you ( ms) studied' 

'he is studying' 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


276 


REPERENCE GRAMMAR 


(hiyya) b-tidris 'she is studying' 

(inta) b-tidris 'you (ms) are studying' 

etc. 

For the sake of convenience, the perfect huwwa ( third person ms ) 
form is used as the "citation" form of the verb ( i.e., the dictionary 
form. Thus daras may be translated as 'to study' although a literal 
trctnslation would be 'he studied.' Notice that the perfect huwwa form 
is a natural choice in two senses : it is shorter than the other perfect 
forms, 6ind it yields those forms through the addition of certain suffixes. 

■kitit kick kkk 

VERB : CLASSIFICATION BY ROOT TYPE 

Verbs are divisible into two large groups : the triliteral and the 
quadriliteral, the former being those with three radicals ( e.g., katab 
'to write', daras 'to study', simi? 'to hear' ) and the latter being 
those with four radicals ( e.g., dafiraq 'to roll (something)' tarqim 
'to translate', dardiS 'to chat' ). 

Triliteral verbs are either sound or weak. A sound verb is one which 
has a sound root ( e.g., talab 'to request', daxaI 'to enter', Sakar 
'to theuik' ) and a weak verb is one which has a weeik root (q.v.). 

Weak verbs fall into three types s the assimilated , the hollow , and the 
defective . The three types are defined as follows : 

(1) Assimilated verbs are those whose initial radical is weak, e.g., 
wisiI 'to arrive' (root wsI ). 

(2) Hollow verbs are those whose middle radical is weak, e.g., naam 
'to sleep' (root nwm) , yaab 'to be absent' (root yyb ). 

(3) Defective verbs are those whose final radical is weak, e.g., daTa 
'to invite (root d?w ), rama 'to throw* (root rmy ), nisi 'to forget' 

(root nsy ). 

For convenience of reference, these classes are teibulated below ; 



EGVPTJMJ ARABIC 


277 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


I. Triliteral 

A. Sound 

B. Weak 

1. Assimilated 

2. Hollow 

3. Defective 

4. Doubled 
II. Quadriliteral 

*** *** *** 

UERB : kaan 


The verbal form kaan (imperfect : yikuun ) functions as carrier of a 
tense, an aspect, or a mood distinction which would otherwise have no 
carrier : 

1. Equational sequences such as ?a Ii ta?baan 'Ali is tired' designate 
contemporaneity. To such sentences may be added the constituent "Perfect" 
( to express past time ), bi- ( to express recurrence ), or Ra- ( to ex¬ 
press futurity ) : 

(a) lali + Perfect + ta?baan 

(b) ?ali + bi- + taRbaan 

(c) Tali + Ra- + taTbaan 

Since "Perfect", bi- and Ra- must be carried by a verbal form, yikuun is 
added to the above sentences : 

(a) Tali + Perfect + yikuun + taTbaan 

(b) Tali + bi- + yikuun + taTbaan 

(c) Tali + Ra- -i- yikuun + taTbaan 

In sentence (a) the sequence Perfect + yikuun produces kaan ; in sentence 
(b), the sequence bi- + yikuun produces biykuun ; and in sentence (c), 
the sequence Ra- + yikuun produces Raykuun . The three sentences there¬ 
for assume the following forms ; 


Tali kaan taTbaan. 

Tali biykuun taTbaan filmasa. 
Tali Raykuun taTbaan. 


'Ali was tired.' 

'Ali is usually tired in the evening. 
'Ali will be tired.' 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


278 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


2. The sentence Ya I i daras 'Ali studied' designates a con^ileted event, 
and the sentence Yali by! dr is 'Ali is studying' designates am event in 
progress. Futurity may be superimposed on both sentences by the addi¬ 


tion of /Fia-/, 

(a) Yali + fia- + daras lamma 

niwsaI. 

(b) Yali + fia- + biyIdris lamma 

niwsaI. 


'Ali will have studied shen we 
arrive.' 

'Ali will be studying when we 
arrive.' 


In sentence (a), the verb daras must retain its perfect form because the 
desired meaning includes completion. Thus fia- cannot combine with the 
following verb to produce fiay idri s . In sentence (b) , the verb must re¬ 
tain bi- because progression is part of the desired mecming. Thus, here 
again, fia- cannot combine with the following verb to produce fiayidris . 

To provide a carrier for fia- in both sentences, y i kuun is added : 

Yali fiaykuun daras lamma niwsal. 'Ali will have studied when we 

arrive.' 

Yali fiaykuun biyidris lamma 'Ali will be studying when we 

niwsal. arrive.' 


3. The sentence yilit wi raafi i ImustaSfa ? 'Did he mistakenly go to 
the hospital?' asks about a completed event ( hence the use of perfect 
verbs ). A subjunctive meaning can be superimposed on the sentence 
( for example, the sentence may be changed to mean 'CcJuld it be that he 
mistakenly went to the hospital?' ); this would require the addition of 
an imperfect form without an aspect prefix. The required form is yi kuun 

yikuun yilit wi raafi iImustaSfa ? 'Could it be that he mistakenly 

went to the hospital?' 

The same process accounts for the occurrence of yikuun in the following 
sentences : 

'Could it be that he loves her?' 
'Could it be that he will go with 


yikuun biyfiibbaha ? 
yikuun fiayruufi maYaaha ? 


her?' 



EGYPTIAN ARABI’C 


279 


PEPERENCE GRAMMAR 


Like all other verbal forms, kaan and 
in number, gender and person : 


(huwwa) 

kaan biyidris. 

(hiyya) 

kaanit bitidris. 

(ana) 

kunt badris. 

etc. 

(huwwa) 

haykuun biyidris. 

(hiyya) 

hatkuun bitidris. 

(ana) 

hakuun badris. 

etc. 

(huwwa) 

kaan Fayirda n?ablu. 

(hiyya) 

kaanit Fatirda n?abilha. 

(inta) 

kunt Fiatirda n?ablak. 




yi kuun agree with the subject 

'He was studying.' 

* She was studying.' 

'I was studying.' 

'He will be studying.' 

'She will be studying.' 

'I will be studying.' 

'He was going to let us see him.' 

'She was going to let us see her.' 
'You (ms) were going to let us see 
you.' 

*** 


VERB MEASURES : MEANINGS OF VERIVEV VERBAL MEASURES 

The contrasts in form between derived and primary verbs are paralleled 
by fairly consistent contrasts in meaning. Before specifying the meanings 
in question, we must emphasize two facts : 

1. The meanings ascribed to a given derived measure hold true in a large 
number of cases where a source verb exists. They hold true less frequently 
when a source verb does not exist. For example, reciprocity is usually 
expressed by Measure III of triliteral verbs; yet of the two Measure III 
verbs kaatib 'to correspond with' and saafir 'to travel', only the first 
has associative meeining. Significantly, kaatib has a source verb ( katab 
'to write' ) while saa fir does not. 

2. There is no root which combines with every verbal measure. For this 
reason, the student may end up with a non-existent word if he yields to 
the temptation of combining a root he knows with a certain measure to 
express a certain meaning. The meanings listed below are given to help 
students guess euid learn the designation of a new verb, rather than to 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


280 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


facilitate the forecasting of unattested verbs. 

The meanings most commonly expressed by the derived measures of triliteral 
verbs are the following : 

1, Measure II is most often used to express the following two desig¬ 
nations : 

(a) Causation , i.e., causing an action ( usually the one specified by 
the corresponding Measure I verb ). Examples xaaf *to be afraid'; xawwif 
'to frighten', dafa? 'to pay: daffa? 'to make (someone) pay', yayyar 'to 
change (something)'. Closely related to this meaming is the designation 
of helping (or enabling) scxneone to perform an action, e.g., laaI 'to 
carry': Sayyi1 'to help (someone) carry', rIkib 'to ride'; rakkib 'to 
give (someone) a ride'. 

(b) Acquisition of a state or a characteristic . Exaii 5 )les : sawwi s 

'to decay (bones)', ^affin 'to rot', warram 'to swell', dawwid 'to become 
wormy', nattin 'to stink'. Measure II verbs with this designation do 
not usually have corresponding source verbs; in most cases, however, 
such verbs have corresponding nouns; e.g., suus 'decay (of bones)', 

Tufuuna 'rottenness', waram 'swelling', duud 'worms', nataana 'stench', 
etc. 

Other meanings expressed by Measure II are ; 

(c) Intensification of some action (usually that specified by the source 
verb ). Examples ; kasar 'to break'; kassar 'to smash', ?ataI 'to kill': 
?att i I 'to slaughter'. 

(d) Estimation , i.e., deeming or regarding . Examples ; kidib 'to lie'; 
kaddib 'to accuse of lying'. 

Because causation is their most frequent meaning. Measure II verbs are 
typically transitive when the source verbs are intransitive amd ditransi¬ 
tive when the source verbs are transitive. 


?a1i xarag. 
ahmad xarrag ?aii. 
fariid akal irruzz. 
?akkalt fariid irruzz. 


'Ali went out.' 

'Ahmad let Ali out.' 

'Farid ate the rice.' 

* I fed Farid the rice.' 


2. The most frequent meaning associated with Measure III is associative. 
Measure III technically means 'to engage someone in a reciprocal activity.' 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


281 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Examples ; katab *to write': kaatib 'to correspond with', Ii?ib 'to play: 
laa?ib 'to play with', naa?il 'to discuss with', Saawir 'to confer with*. 

Measure III verbs which express reciprocity are usually transitive : 

katibtuhum. 'I corresponded with them.' 

In some cases where the Measure III verb has associative meaning, the 
source verb can express the same meaning through co-occurrence with a pre¬ 
position : 

Tali laaTib ibni. 'Ali played with my son.' 

Tali MTib maTa bni. 'Ali played with my son.' 

3. Measure IV often expresses causation . Examples : zahar 'to ap¬ 
pear': azhar 'to show', saar 'to rebel': asaar 'to agitate', awqad 

'to bring about'. Measiire IV verbs which express causation are typically 
transitive : 

asaar iSlaTb. 'He agitated the people.' 

In expressing causation. Measure II is used more commonly than Measure 
IV ( and seems to be supplanting it in EA ). Use of Measure IV to ex¬ 
press causation is indicative of education and acquaintance with Standard 
Arabic. 

4. Measvire V has three common usages : 

(a) It may add reflexivity to the meaning of the source verb ( i.e., 
the Measure II verb ). For example, the Measure II verb Ta1 Iim means 
'to teach', and the Measure V verb 11Ta11itn means 'to learn ( i.e., to 
obted.n learning on one's own or with the help of another )'. Measure V 
verbs which indicate reflexivity usually have animate subjects. 

(b) It may indicate the acquisition of a state or a characteristic . 
Examples : itfiaqqar 'to become petrified', itkabbar 'to be pompous'. 

Here corresponding source verbs rarely exist, but corresponding nouns 
and adjectives often do ( e.g., Fiaqar 'a stone', kibi ir 'big' ). 

(c) It may indicate the passive of the source verb . Examples : saxxan 

'to heat (something)'; itsaxxan 'to be heated', qanmaT 'to gather to¬ 
gether': itqammaT 'to be gathered together'. 

A Measure V verb is usually intransitive unless the soxirce verb is di- 



EGVFTIAN ARABIC 


282 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


( in which case the Measure V verb takes one object ) : 


transitive 

salma tkabbarit. 
ilkutub di tgamma?it fi 
xamsiin sana. 

?a11imt wdaad Tarabi. 
widaad itfallimit ?arabi 


' Salma became pon^raus. ‘ 

'These books were collected over 
a period of fifty years•' 

'I taught Widad Arabic.' 

'Widad learned Arabic.' 


It might be mentioned in passing that the prefix it- is consistently 

associated with intransitivity and passivity. Thus (, in addition to 

a 

Measure V ) the Measures itPaaTiL # itFa?aL and ItFayLiL express passi¬ 
vity as well as intransitivity. This fact will be reiterated below. 

5. Measure VI is commonly associated with three meanings : 

{a) Reciprocity . Examples : kaatib 'to correspond with (someone)'; 
itkaatib 'to correspond with each other', baafiis 'to confer with (some¬ 
one) ' ; itbaafiis 'to confer together'. A Measure VI verb which expresses 
reciprocity is usually derived from a Meastire III verb which also ex¬ 
presses reciprocity; when such is the case, the two verbs differ in re¬ 
gard to the constructions where they occur ; 

(i) The Measure III verb is usually treuisitive, while the Measure VI 
verb is usually intransitive; this is because the object of the former 
usually becomes part of a compound phrase which functions as s\ibject of 
the latter ; 


fariid raasiI ?al i . 
fariid wiYaIi traslu. 


'Farid corresponded with Ali.' 
'Farid and Ali corresponded with 
each other.' 


(ii) The Measure III verb is not restricted in regard to taking a 
singular subject. In contrast, the Measure VI verb usually has a dual 
or a plural subject ; 

fariid kaatib Yali. 'Farid corresponded with Ali.' 

itta I amza tkatbu. 'The students corresponded with 

each other.' 

As seen from the above examples, the Measure VI verb is often translatable 
by an expression including 'with each other' or 'together'. 



EGyPTIAM ARABIC 


283 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


(iii) When it has a singular siiibject, the Measure VI verb is usually 
followed by a preposition : 

fariid itkaatib ma?a Tali. 'Farid corresponded with Ali.' 

In addition to the syntactic differences specified above, Measures III 
and VI differ semantically. While Measure III indicates that the subject 
of the verb initiates the action, Measure VI indicates equal participation 
by the p 2 urties involved. 

(b) Feigning . Exan^sles : itmaawit 'to feign death', itnaawim 'to pre¬ 
tend to be asleep*. 

(c) The passive of Measure III . The following is cm exait^jle : 

saTidna fariid. 'We helped Farid.' 

fariid itsaaTid. 'Farid was helped.' 

As illustrated by the above examples. Measure VI verbs are typically in¬ 
transitive . 

6. Measure VII is commonly used in two contexts ; to ejqiress "yielding" 
and reflexivity . The two usages are explained below. 

(a) Yielding is a common meaning expressed by Measure VII. Arabic verbs 
which express yielding are sometimes tremslatable by intransitive English 
verbs ( e.g., ilbaab infatafi 'the door opened', ilfinqaan inkasar 'the cup 
broke' ). Other times they are translatable by the English passive con¬ 
struction, which tends to obscure a distinction in EA. Compare the fol¬ 
lowing sentences : 


iIbaab infatafi fag?ah. 
maTrafS mi in fatafi ilbaab. 
iI Ii aTrafu inn iIbaab 
itfataFi (- infatah) 


'The door opened suddenly.' 

'I do not know who opened the door; 
what I do know is that the door 
was opened .' 


In both sentences it is true that someone or something opened the door, 
and that the agent is unknown; the difference is that the first sentence 
highlights what the recipient (the door) did: it yielded to the action 
of an agent. Thus the difference between the construction with inFaTaL - 
itFaTai and the passive construction may be represented as follows ; 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


284 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


inFaTaL construction Passive construction 

Agent is unknown. Agent is unlcnown. 

Action of the recipient is high- Existence of an agent is high¬ 
lighted. lighted. 

The measure inFa?aL is indicative of education and acquaintance with 
St 2 mdard Arabic. Many Egyptians ( especially those not so influenced by 
Standard Arabic ) usually use i tFa?aL ( rather than i nFa?aL ) to e:q>ress 
yielding; even educated Egyptieuis, when spezdting informally, often use 
!tFa?aL to express yielding. As has already been mentioned, the measure 
!tFa?aL often e;q)resses passivity; therefore the context may be the only 
means of deciding whether a given verb of the Measure itFaTaL indicates 
passivity or yielding. 

(b) Reflexivity is a meaming expressed by a few Measure VII verbs. 
Exaii?>les ; saraf 'to dismiss': insaraf ’to dismiss oneself = to depart', 
saFiab 'to withdraw (someone) '; insafiab 'to withdraw oneself.' Measure VII 
verbs which express reflexivity typically have animate subjects and are 
not usually replaceable by verbs of the measure itFaTaL . 

Measure VII is typically intransitive as cam be seen from the following 
examples : 

ilfingaan inkasar. 'The cup broke.' 

i I beet inhadam. 'The house fell down.' 

ilnnandubiin insarafu. 'The delegates left.' 

7. Measure VIII expresses a variety of meanings each of which is desig¬ 
nated by a handful of verbs. The relatively frequent meanings are reflexi¬ 
vity and reciprocity . 

(a) Reflexive Measure VIII verbs are typically intransitive eind have 
animate subjects. Examples ; gama? 'to bring together'; igtama? 'to 
come together', na?al 'to move or transfer (soemone) inta?aI '(for some¬ 
one)' to move'. 


il?ustaaz gama? ittalamza. 
ittalamza gtamaTu. 
ilmudiir na?al ilmuwazzaf 
Iimadiina b?iida. 


"Hie professor gathered the students. 
'The students gathered.' 

'The director moved the employee 
to a distant city.' 



EGYPTTAN ARABIC 


285 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Mmuwazzaf Inta?al limadiina 
b?Iida. 


'The employee moved to a distant 
city.' 


(b) Beciprocal verbs of Measure VIII usually have two or more agents 
If it heis only agent a Measure VIII verb takes a preposition : 


samiira ?asamit ilgibna. 
samilra wfariid l?'tasamu 
Igibna. 

ilbanaat i?tasamu Igibna. 

samiira ?tasamit iigibna mafa 
farlid. 


'Samira divided the cheese.' 

' Samira and Farid divided the 
cheese between them.' 

'The girls divided the cheese aunong 
them. 

'Samira divided the cheese with 
Farid.' 


8. Measure IX usually indicates color; it means 'to become or to turn 
a certain color.' Examples : iftmarr 'to become red', ixdarr 'to become 
green', isfarr 'to become yellow', 1 byadd 'to become vrtiite', iswadd 'to 
become black', izra?? 'to beccane blue'. Verbs of this type are intransi¬ 
tive : 

ittiffaafi ifimarr. 'The apples turned red.' 

9. Measure X has several, meamings of which the most frequent are the 
following : 

(a) Estimation. Examples : istafila 'to consider (something) sweet or 
pleasant', istamsax 'to consider (something) distasteful', istazraf 'to 
consider (someone) nice', istafbat 'to consider (someone) str 4 )id.' 

(b) Seeking to bring about an event ( usually that which is designated 
by the source verb ). Examples : yafar 'to forgive': istayfar 'to seek 
forgiveness', f ihim 'to understand': istafhim 'to inquire'. 

istayfar rabbu. 'He asked forgiveness of his Lord.' 

istafhimna ?an mi?aad ligtimaa?. 'We inquired about the time of the 

meeting.' 


(c) Causative - middle ( cause something to happen for one's own 
benefit ). Examples : Istaxdim 'to use (something); to enploy (some¬ 
one)*, ista?miI 'to use (something)'. This meaning is closely related 


to the one described in (b) above. For example, iStaxdim is derived from 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


286 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


xadam ; the source verb means 'to serve', and the derived verb means 'to 
seek service from Csanething)'. 

10. The Measure itFa?aL frequently designates the following : 

(a) Yielding . Verbs in this category are typically intransitive : 

ilbaab itfatafi. 'The door opened.' 

iI beet Ithadam. 'The house fell down.' 

As has already been pointed out, a given root may conbine either with 
inFa?aL or with itFa^aL to express yielding; thus inkasar 'to break' is 
equivalent in meaning to itkasar . The difference between inFa?aL and 
itFa^aL , when both express yielding, is as follows : 

(i) The former measure indicates that the speaker is educated and ac¬ 
quainted with Standard Arabic. 

(ii) The former measure includes certain verbs to which no correspond¬ 
ing verbs of the latter measure exist, e.g., in?a?ad '(for a meeting) to 
convene'. Most of the verbs in question are borrowings from Standard 
Arabic, 

(b) The passive of Measure I. Examples ; 

talamziti fihmu ddars. 'My students understood the lesson.' 

iddars itfaham. 'The lesson was understood.' 

Passive verbs of the measure itFa9aL are typically intransitive : 

ilfiukuuma saganit ilgawasiis. 'The government put the spies in jail. 

ilgawasiis itsaganu. 'The spies were put in jail.' 

11. Some verbs of the Measure istaFay7aL indicate intensification, e.g., 
istamanna 'to yearn for (something)' : 

fariida btistamanna kiima minnu. 'Farida yearns for a word from him.' 

The itFaTaL and istaFaTYaL forms do not exist in Standard Arabic. 

12. Of the quadriliterals only Measure II verbs are consistently asso¬ 
ciated with particuleu: meanings. Measure II expresses the meanings which 
are usually designated by the prefix it- . 

(a) It may express reflexivity ; 

fariid dafirag ilfiagar. 'Farid rolled the stone.' 

fariid iddafirag 9a IfiaSiiS. 'Farid rolled on the grass.' 



EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


287 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


(b) It may express yielding : 

za??eet ilftagar faddaftrag- 'I pushed the stone and it rolled.' 

(c) It may e:q>ress the passive of the source verb ; 

targimt iltnaqaala mbaarifi. 'I translated the article yesterday.' 

ilmaqaala ttargimit imbaariFi. 'The article was translated yester¬ 
day. ' 


*** 


l/ERB MEASURES ; PRIMARY MV VEHJVEV 


Some measures of EA verbs are derxved from other measures. For example. 


Measure VI ( itFaaSiL ) is formed by 
( FaaSiL ). In the following table, 
the right; for each derived measure. 

Source 

Triliteral ; 

I 

II 

III 

X + II 

Quadriliteral ; 

I 


adding the prefix it- to Measure III 
the derived measures are listed on 
! source is given on the left : 

Derived 

II, III, IV, VII, VIII, X, itFa?aL 

V 

VI 

istaFaSSaL 

II, IV 


For convenience of reference, triliterals of Measures II - X are called 
"derived triliterals”. For the same reason, quadriliterals of Measure II 
and Measure IV are called "derived quadriliterals". 


*** 


*** 


*** 



EGVPTIAH ARABIC 


288 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


VERB : QUAVRILITERALS CLASSJFIEP BV STEM MEASURE 

Listed below cure the measures of quadriliteral verbs; the perfect form 
precedes the imperfect, with a colon separating the two forms. Notice 
that EA does not have the form !F?anLaL which exists in Standard Arabic 
as Measure III. 

(1) Measure I of the quadrilitereil is Fa ?! i L : y iFa^LlL , or Fa^LaL : 
y iFa?LaL . The difference in the stem vowel is usually predictable in 
terms of the adjacent consonants : in general, /a/ occurs next to gut- 
terals and emphatics, while /i/ occurs next to other consonants. Some 
examples are : 

margaFi ’to swing (someone)': yimargaFi 

far?aT 'to pop, to burst'; yifar?a? 

dafirag 'to roll (something)': yidaFirag 

gargar 'to drag': yigargar 

bafitar 'to scatter'; yibaFitar 

gaIg i I 'to reverberate'; yigaIgiI 

bahdiI 'to treat contemptuously'; yibahdiI 

?arbid 'to be boisterous': yi?arbid 

(2) Measure II of quadriliteral verbs is itFa?LiL ; yitFa?LiL or 

itFa^LaL : yitFatLaL . The difference between the stem vowels is deter¬ 
mined by the environment ; /a/ occvirs next to gutturals and emphatics, 

vdiile /]/ occurs elsewhere. They are intransitive or passive. Examples 

itmargaFi 'to swing (intransitive)'; yitmargaR 
itdaRrag 'to roll (intransitive)': yitdaFirag 
itgargar 'to be dragged'; yftgargar 
itbaRtar 'to be scattered': yitbafitar 
itba!biI 'to be confused': yitbaIbiI 

(3) Measure IV of the quadriliteral is iF?aLaLL ; yiF?aLiLL . Some 
exat^les are : 

itma?ann 'to be reassured'; y ttnna?inn 
iglafarr 'to shudder': yigla?irr 




ieifit 


itit* 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


289 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


VERB : SUEJUNCTIVE 


The siabjunctive denotes a possibility ( as opposed to a fact ). Compare, 
for example, the underlined verbs in the following sentences ; 

biyruuB masr kul1 seef. 'He goes to Egypt every summer.' 

?aawiz yirruuFi masr kul i seef. 'He wants to go to Egypt every 

summer.' 


The underlined verb in the first sentence indicates a fact : the 
subject—as a matter of fact—does go to Egypt every summer. On the other 
hand, the underlined verb in the second sentence indicates a possibility 
which may or may not materialize. 

Specifically, a sijbjunctive construction denotes possibility, proba¬ 
bility, wish, hope, desire, intent, fear, expectation, preference, choice, 
acceptance, attempt, command, exhortation, permission, duty, obligation, 
necessity, ability, etc. All of these fall within the range of possibi¬ 
lity ( as opposed to fact ), and will therefore be called subjunctival 


The general concept of possibility ( as opposed to fact ) is marked by 
the absence of the aspect prefix; the particular subjunctival submeaning 
( obligation, necessity, wish, desire, etc. ) is usiially specified lexi¬ 
cally by a form which precedes the "bare" imperfect ( e.g., a modal or a 
participle ) ; 


labudd yidris. 
laazim yidris. 
naawi yidris. 


'He must study.' 

'He must study.' 

'He intends to study.' 


A form which specifies the subjunctival si±imeaning may be deleted when 
the context makes its presence redundant : 

(a) tigiiii I beet ? 'Can you come to my house?' 

(b) aagi mta ? {= tifiibb aagi 'When would you like me to come?' 

mta ?) 


Subjvinctive meaning cannot be expressed by lexical specification alone; 
absence of the aspect prefix is necessary. Thus both of the following 
sentences contain the form labudd 'must', but only the first expresses 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


290 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


subjunctive meaning : 

labudd yruuFi. 'He must go,' 

labudd biyruuF. 'It must be a fact that he goes.' 

Clearly, yiruuF in the first sentence expresses a possible event—one 
that may or may not occur. On the other hand, biyruuFi in the second sen¬ 
tence expresses a fact rather than a possibility ; the sentence means 
' It is my conclxision that he goes'. This is equivalent to saying that 
the first sentence hats a verb which expresses possibility and a modal 
which specifies the type of possibility, while the second sentence has 
a verb which e:q>resses a fact euid an adverb which says something about 
that fact. The same difference distinguishes the following two sentences : 

yimkin yiruufiu. 'They might go.' 

yimkin biyruufiu. 'Perhaps they go.' 

The second sentence may be paraphrased by 'The fact that they go is not 
certain.' 

Sometimes the distinction signalled by the STibjunctive is very subtle; 
compare, for example, the following sentences ; 

yimkin yiruuFi. 'He might go,' 

yimkin Fiayruufi. 'It is possible that he will go.' 

The two sentences are very similar in meaning; nevertheless, the absence 
of an aspect prefix from the first sentence and the presence of such a 
prefix in the second results in a subtle distinction : while the first 
sentence straightforwardly asserts a possibility, the second states a 
fact and ( by means of am adverb ) assigns a degree of probability to 
that fact. The degree of probadiility may be shifted to the other end of 
the scale by changing the adverb ; 

qat?an Fayruufi. 'He most certainly will go.' 

Note : 

It was stated above that the subjunctival submeaning is usually expressed 
lexically by a form which precedes the bare imperfect. There are, however, 
a few verbs whose imperfect occurs without an aspect prefix to express 
both possibility ( as opposed to fact ) and the subjunctival submeaning. 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


291 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


The verbs in question are those which we have called Class I auxiliaries 
( see Verbs ; Auxiliaries ), and the subjunctival subme^u^ing expressed 
is usually some kind of provision or condition. 


lam?i yfiibb yruuFi. 'Lam'i would like to go (if he can, 

if given a choice, etc.).' 

faxri yirda yruufi. 'Faxri would agree to go (if asked 

to do so, etc.).' 


The majority of Class I aiixilieiries can be used to produce contrasts 
like the following : 


mamduuh 

fiayfiibb yruufi. 

'Mamduh 

mamduuh 

biyfiibb yruufi. 

'Mamduh 

mamduuh 

fiaabib yiruufi. 

'Mamduh 

mamduuh 

yifiibb yruufi. 

'Mamduh 


will want to go.' 
usually wants to go.' 
is desirous of going.' 
would like to go.' 


it*it ieltit 


VERB : TENSE 


EA verbs show two tenses : the perfect and the imperfect . 

The perfect most frequently designates the following ; 

1. An event which was completed prior to the mon^nt of speaking : 

min yumeen luftaha hina. 'Two days ago I saw her here.' 

2. An event which took place at some past time but whose results 
linger on : 

fihimt. 'I have understood.' 

masr itTaddimit xaalis. 'Egypt has progressed a great deal. 

3. An event which is considered completed immediately upon the act of 
speaking or by the very act. Verbs which designate this meaning are often 
translatable by an eaqpression including herewith or hereby . 

a— uskut. 'Shut up." 

b— sikitt. 'Fine, I'm shutting upl' 




EGypTIM ARABIC 


292 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


a— bi?haali. 'Sell it to me.* 

b— biftahaalak. 'I hereby sell it to you.' 

The imperfect form usiaally occurs with one of the aspect prefixes bf- 
of fta- ha-. For the meanings of bi- and fia- , ( see : Verb ; Aspect ). 
Absence of an aspect prefix usually designates subjunctive meaning ( see: 
Verb : The Subjunctive ). 

Perfect verbs jure characterized by the fact that they take suffixes 
but not prefixes. In contrast, in 5 )erfect verbs jure characterized by 
the fact that some forms have prefixes only while others have prefixes 
as well as suffixes. In the following examples, the stem is underlined ; 


Perfect Imperfect 


(hiyya) 

katabit 

t i kt i b 

(i fina) 

katabna 

n i kt i b 

(inti) 

katabti 

t i kt i b i 

(intu) 

katabtu 

t i ktibu 


etc. 

etc. 


*** *** *** 

VERB : TRILITERALS CLASSIFIED BY STEM MEASURE 

The table below shows the measures of triliteral verbs. For each mea¬ 
sure, the perfect and in^serfect forms are given, with examples in paren¬ 
theses. Notice that : 

1. The Romjui nvuneral assigned to a given measure is the one which 
designates the corresponding measutre in Modem Standjurd Arabic. The last 
two measures are left unnumbered since they do not exist in Modem Stjuidard 
Arabic. 

2. The measures of assimilated verbs are identical to those of sound 
verbs. For this reason, assimilated verbs do not occur in the table as a 
distinct category ( but see Note 3 below the table ). 

3. The word or in the table indicates unpredictability. The sign 
indicates free variation. 





WSVrriM ASASK 


294 


ZEFEmCE GtlAMUAX 


Soond Doublad 


Perfect 

mperfect 

Perfect 

loperfect 

I pa?at or PKli. 
(katab 'to write' 
tlrif 'to know') 

a 

ylFfiL (SM Mots 
u 

6 for cxui^os) 

Faf? (?add 'to 
count', marr 'to 

pass') 

h 

ylrlTY (vltidd) or 
ylFuf? (yimurr) 

II FaftaL (fiassan 
'to fortify') 
pafVIt (darris 
'to taach') 

yiFatVII 

(vihassan) 

ylFafrit 

(vidarris) 

Pa??at (karrar 
'to repeat') 

Fa7?i? (sabbib 
'to cause') 

yiFa??af 

(yikarrar) 
yiFaftl? 

(yisabbib) 

HI Faafll. (kaatib 1 

'to eorreapond | 

with') 

yipaa?!! 

(yikaatib) 



IV aF^aL (aYdafli 'to 
execute') 

imiii 

aFat? (afadd 'to 
prepare (saae> 
thing)') | 

yipi?t (yi?idd) 

V itpafTai, (itfiassani 

yitFa??aL 

(yitfiassan) j 

yltFaf?lL 

(ylt?arzlb) 

itpaWaf {Itkarrar 

yitPaTTa? 

(y Itkarrar) 

yltpaffl? 

(yitbaddid) 

'to be fortified') 

(tpafTiL (It?azz(b i 

'to be repeated') j 
itpaffl? (itbaddid | 

'to suffer') 

'to b« dispersed') | 

1 

VI ItFaaVH (ttkaatib 

yltFaa?IIi 

(yitkaatib) 

1 


'to correspond 
with each other*) 

VIIA inFa?aI> (Insafiab 
'to withdraw')* 

yinFI7Il> 

(yinsifiib) 

inPaJ? (InSa?? 'to 
split') 

yinpa?t (yinSa??) 

VIII iFtaVai (iStarak) 

'to participate') 

ylFtlTlL 

(yi2tirik) 

iFtat? (Ifitadd 'to 
becooe angry') 

viFtaf? (ylfitadd) 

IX iP?au, (ifimarr 
'to turn red') 

VlF?au, (yifimarr) 



X istaFfaL (lsta?bai 

yIstaF?aL 

(yistafbat) 

yistaFtll. 

(vista?mll) 

istapaf? (Istafadd 

yistaPIVt 

(yistafidd) 

'to act sti^id') 
istaFflL (tstarmll 


' to use') 

VIIB itFatal (itna?al 

'to bm transferred'! 

yItPItiL 

(yltiii7ll) 


yitpat? (yitgann) 

X + II istapatJaL 

Cistala??af 'to 

yistaPariai. 

(vistala??af) 

istaPaTtaf 
(istafiainnam 'to 

yistaFaYTat 

catch (e.g., a 
ball)') 


bathe*) ' 

• 1 

1 














































Egym/W ARABIC 


29S 


KEFBmicE ammn 


Hollow _ Dafoctivo 


Parfac« 

laiperfect 

Perfect 


IHOIi <raaft 'to go ’, 
naam 'to slaap', 
gaao 'to bring') 

viFbuI, (vlruufi) 
ylnal (vinaam) 
vlFIlL (viollb) 

Fafa (raoa 'to iae- 
plore', data 'to 
Invita', bana 'to 
build, sa?a 'to at- 
topt') or 

Pl7l (nisi 'to for- 
get', oirl 'to run') 


FaffaXi (fawwar 'to 
injure’, bavvad 
'to paint') 

FafTiL (katiwin 'to 
fom', 7avvtn 'to 
appoint') 

ylFanal, (yt?awwar, 
VI bavvad) 

yipafVIi, (ytkawwin, 
yifavvin) 

Fa77a (rabba 'to 
rear, bring up') 

vlpa771 (ylrabbi) 

Faafli. (RaawiI 'to 
try', taavln 'to 
inspect') 

ylFaatiL (vlRaawil. 
yifaavin) 

Faafa (naada 'to 
call to’) 

ylFaaTI (ylnaadl) 

apaai, (araal 'to 
raaiovo') 

ylFlU, (vizitt) 

aP7a (avra 'to en¬ 
tice') 

ylF?I (ylyrl) 

itFatral (Ittawwar 
'to evolTe', 

Itfiavvar 'to be 
pozsled') 

ItFafTtL (It7a»n(id 
'to becoae accus- 
toaed', rt7avvin 
'to be ^pointed') , 

yItFattai. 

(vittawwar. 

yithavvar) 

yitPa77lL 

(vlt7awwld. 

vltfavvin) 

ItFaffa (ttmanna 
'to wish') 

/ltFa??a (yltmanna) 

itFaatil. (Itfaawin 
'to co-operate’, 
Itfiaavil 'to 
plead') 

yitFaafIL (y)t?aawl 
vltflaavtl) 

njltFaa?a (Itfaada 
J'to avoid') 

yitFaa?a (vltfaada) 

inFaaL (Insaab 'to 
flow') 

yinFaal, (yinsaab) 

inpafa (Inmaha 'to 
vanish') 

ylnpl?I (yinmifil) 

iFtaal (IRtaao 'to 
be in need') 

vlFtaaL (ylAtaao) 

IFta7a (Intaha 'to 
end') 

viPtITI (vintihl) 

iF7aLL (iswadd 'to 
turn blacic', ibvadd 
'to turn white') 

viFTatL (viswadd. 

Vibvadd) 

IFTali (iftlaww 'to 
Ibecooie good-loo)c- 
ing') 

ylFTalLL (vlhlaww) 

i staFaaL (1 staaaa b 
'to respond) 

njn 

!staF7a (1 stay la 
'to consider sooe- 
ching expensive') 

yistaF?! ylstaP?a 
(ylstayll yistayla) 

itFaaL (Itbaa? 'to 
be sold') 

1 

yJtraai. (yitbaaf) 

Itpafa (Itfama 'to 
becoae blind') 

vitFitI (yitTIml) 

istsFaftal, 
(istarayyafi 'to 

y i stapa77ai. 
{yistaravvafi) 

1 staFa?7a (I stayafima 
'to blindfold one¬ 
self, Istaraqga 
'to is^lore', 
Istaxabba 'to hide' 


rest') 






















































EGVmM ARABIC 


296 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


The following notes are applicable to the above table ; 

1. Hollow verbs of Measure II are the same in shape as the sound 
counterpaurts; so are hollow verbs of Measure III, Measure V, Measure VI, 
Measure IX, and the last measure. Hollow verbs of other measures are not 
the same in shape cis the sound counterparts. 

2. As the mutaawi? ("yielding" form) of FaTaL ( see : Vea* Meastires : 
Meaning ), inFa^aL is interchangeable with _[tFa£aL. The following quali¬ 
fications restrict this statement : 

(a) i nFa?aL is more common than itFa^aL in the speech of educated 
Egyptians. Thus an educated Egyptian is likely to say ilbaab infatafi 
'the door opened' rather than ilbaab ttfatafi ( although both forms are 
possible ). 

(b) For some verbs, the form !nFa?aL exists without the alternative 
possibility of itFa?aL ( most of those verbs are borrowings from Modem 
Standard Arabic ); for exanple, the form for 'to be impetuous' is !ndafa? 
but not * itdafay . 

3. The first radical of assimilated verbs is totally assimilated to 
the /t/ of iFtaYali . Thus Measure VIII from the root wsI is ittasa I 
rather than * iwtasaI; from wf? , ittafa? rather than * iwtafa? ; and from 
wzn , ittazan rather than * iwtazan. In contrast, the first radical of 
assimilated verbs is not assimilated to the /t/ of itFa?aL , e.g., itwasaI , 
itwazan . 

4. In the case of most measures, the perfect and the imperfect forms 
have the same vowel pattern; for exaii 5 >le, Fa??lL and viFa??iL share the 
vowel pattern a-i . 

5. Some derived measures* have two perfect-tense forms : one whose 
stem vowel is /a/, and another whose stem vowel is /i/; for exanple, the 
perfect of Measure II is either Fa??aL of Fa??iL . The difference between 
the two forms is usually predictable from the environment : the stem 
vowel is /a/ if it is adjacent to one of certain segments, and /]/ 
otherwise. The segments in question are (a) the back consonants /?/, 

/h/, /fi/, /?/, /x/, /y/, and (b) the en 5 >hatic consonants /s/, /?/, /t/, 
/d/, /r/. Examples are wabbax 'to scold', waddaFi 'to clarify', lamma? 

'to polish', naddaf 'to clean', kassiI 'to be lazy', ?avvin 'to appoint'. 


* Except for the first, all of the measures listed in the chart are "derived" 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


297 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


a 

6. In the imperfect tense. Measure I of soimd triliterals is yiPfiL 

u 

( i.e., yipyiL , yiF?aL , or yiP^uL ). it is impossible, given a sound 
perfect-tense form of the measiire PaYaL , to predict with certainty the 
imperfect form. Nevertheless, the following rules facilitate prediction 
in a large number of instances : 

(a) The stem vowel is /a/ next to a guttural ( i.e., /?/, /h/, /fi/, 

and /Y/ ); e.g., yis?aI ’he asks', yinhab 'he plunders', yismaFi 'he allows' 
yi IYan 'he curses'. Notice, however, that the stem vowel is not usually 
/a/ next to a glottal stop which corresponds to /q/ in the Modem Stan¬ 
dard Arabic pronunciation of the verb; e.g., yir?ud 'to lie down' 

(Standard ; /yarqud/). 

(b) The stem vowel is /u/ next to a back consoneuit which is not a 
guttural or next to an emphatic consonant, provided that the other adja¬ 
cent consonant is not a guttural. The consonants in question are /q/, 

/k/, /g/, /x/» /Y/ and the emphatic consonants are /?/, /z/, /t/, /d/, 
and /r/. Exair 5 )les are : yisqul 'to burnish', yiskun 'to dwell', yisgud 
'to bow down', yidxul 'to enter', yizyud 'to nudge', ytfisud 'to reap', 
yinzur 'to look, yiltub 'to ccuicel', yirfud 'to refuse', yififur 'to dig'. 
The stem vowel is usually /u/ if it is adjacent to a glottal stop which 
corresponds to a /q/ in the Standard pronunciation; e.g., y< r?ud 'to 
lie down ' (Standard /yarqud/), yis?ub 'to pierce' (Standard ; /yaSqub/). 

(c) Otherwise, the stem vowel is /'>/; e.g., yi^bid 'to worship', 
yixdim 'to serve', yins if 'to blow up (something)'. 

7. The in^erfect of PiiYiL is usually yiPYal ; e.g., Yi I im 'to know'; 
yiYlam , rikib 'to ride': yirkab , tiwiI 'to become tali'; yitwaI . Some 
exceptions 2 Lre YimiI 'to do'; yiYmiI , I ibis 'to wear': yiIbis , niziI 
'to descend'; yinziI . 

8. Given a perfect form of the measure FaaL , it is impossible to fore¬ 
cast the imperfect form. 

Notice that for Measure I of hollow verbs there aure three imperfect 
shapes ( y tPuuI. , yiPi iL , and y iFaaL ) but only one perfect shape ( FaaL ) . 
The student is therefore advised to learn the imperfect form of each 
Measure I hollow verb, amd from it to obtain the perfect counterpart. 

The alternative to this procedure is to learn both the perfect and the 
in^erfect as items. 



EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


298 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


9. In the case of Measure I defective verbs, the iii 5 >erfect forms eure 
not totally predictable from the prefect forms. Of the imperfect forms 
listed, viF?u and viF?i are relatively rare : 

(a) The form y iF?u pertains to a few~but not to all-verbs whose last 


radical is /w/ ; 

Perfect Imperfect 

raga 'to implore* (root: rgw) yirgu 

sama 'to be eminent' (root: smw) yismu 

da9a 'to invite' (root: d9w) yid9i 

iaka 'to ccanplain about' (root; Skw) yilki 


(b) yiF9i is the imperfect of Fi9i in a few instances; in most cases, 
the imperfect of Fi9i is yiF9a ; 


Perfect Imperfect 

giri 'to run' yigri 

nisi 'to forget' yinsa 

Ii?i 'to find' yil?a 

ridi 'to be satisfied' yirda 


10. When the second syllable of the imperfect contains /u/ or /uu/, 
the prefix is yi- yu- ; e.g., y ixrug -> yuxrug 'to go out', yiFiutt ^ 
yufiutt 'to put', yiruufi /w yuruuft 'to go'. 

11. The /n/ of Measure VII is usually replaced by /m/ before the 
labial consonants /b/, /f/, amd /m/ ; 

itnbaa9 'to be sold' yimbaa9 

imfagar 'to explode' yimfigir 

immafia 'to vanish' yirrmifii 

12. Each triliteral measure has more than one shape; in other words, 
a measure is a class of shapes. For example. Measure IV embraces the 
shapes aF9aL (sound), aFa99 (doubled), aFaaL (hollow), and aF9a (defective). 
The differences between these shapes are predictable in terms of general 
phonological rules which hold true throughout the language ( e.g., /awa/ — ^ 
/aa/ ). Through the application of the rules in question, the sound 

shape yields the other shapes ( e.g., Fawal, and FayaL become FaaL ). For 
this reason, the soxmd shape stands for the measure as a whole, and the 
other shapes are considered veuriants. 


*** 


*** 





EGynUN ARABIC 


299 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


VERBAL NOUNS : VEFINIJENESS 

An Arabic noun is indefinite when its meaning is anbiguous ( i.e., when 
it is likely to elicit the question "Which one?" ). It is definite when 
its mezming is not ambiguous ( i.e., when it does not normally elicit the 
question "Which one?" ). 

Abstract verbal noiuis ( see Verbal Noms : Meeming ) have unambiguous 
designations, and for that reason they are definite in form. Consider, 
for example, the underlined verbal nouns in the following sentences : 

1. iI?1Im afisan min iggahI . 'Education is better than ignorance. ’ 

2. fahm ilmu§kila di saTb. 'Understanding this problem is difficult.' 

One who hears sentence 1 would not normally ask "Which education?" or 
"Which ignorance?" because reference is to education and ignorance in 
general. Likewise, one who hears sentence 2 is not likely to ask "Which 
understanding?" In other words, !I?iIm , iqqahl , and fahm ( as used in 
the above sentences ) are definite in meaning. For this reason, they 
have definite forms. Notice that the English equivalents are not pre¬ 
ceded by the. This fact often misleads students who try to fashion 
Arabic expressions after English ones . 

The statement that abstract verbal noxms are definite in form means 
that such verbal nouns occur (a) with the definite article or (b) as the 
first term of a construct phrase ; 

ittadriis sa?b. 'Teaching is difficult.' 

tadriis illuya l?inqliiziyya 'Teaching English is difficult.' 

sa?b. 

Concrete ( i.e., not abstract ) verbal nouns may be definite or indefi¬ 
nite in form : 

?areena tta?rIir . 'We read the report.' 

?areena ta?riir . 'We read a report.' 






*ltir 






EGYPUAN ARABIC 


300 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


l/ERBAL NOUNS : VERIVATJON 

Listed below are the verbal nouns of the various triliteral verb forms. 
In each case, the verb form precedes the verbal noun, with a colon sepa¬ 
rating the two. Examples are given in parentheses. 






(9 

0) <0 
fu 

0 

^ J ‘ 

to 

— « 

(D O Cm 
4i 
« 

d->5: 

ro ^ 
fa 

(0 »• 
■o^ g < 

5 - -H 
> • ** . 
•H ^ •H 
•• <0 0 ) 
•H 0) C 

— a .Q <0 
C/* c w 

— « 0 -M 
fa V4 4J e 

fr4 • M » 

hJ ^ -. 

<0 iH M 
O- »«-» '«-' 

«0 
fa 


si U»4 k -H 

2 - - CO 

3 • A « 4i 
O Jtf D» • • 

a b •H o 

« O 

S 0 o-F 
.y ^ (oiu 
O - • X « 

— Tjica 
*0 (0hoh- SI- 
aLc| sf 
0} (0 (OjiJ L.I 
J3 C M^S S 
h 3 X 

0) •» »c« 

> X u 3 - 

§ «0 »- fa • 

<0 — *i 
U' 

M 3 <0 ^ X 
44 « ' N fl> 



M 





IstaF^aLs IstiFtaaL ( tsta^bat 'to act stupid': IstlYbaat) IstaFay^; fstlF^aat ( tsta^add 'to get ready': tstITdaad ) 




















Hollow___ I Defective 



IstaFaaL: (staFaaLa ( Istaqaab 'to respond'i 1st Igaaba , IstaFYai IstiFaa? ( I stay I a 'to consider something 
Istafaad 'to benefit'! IstIbaada ) expensive'! IstIvIaa?, Istawla 'to take 

over; to seize'! 1stIwlaa?) 
















EGYVTIAN ARABIC 


304 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


The following notes pertain to the above chart : 

1. Measure I verbs, especially the sound, have unpredictable verbal 
nouns. The student is therefore advised to learn the verbal noun for 
each Measure I verb as an item. 

2. Measure II verbs ( especially when designating causation or inten¬ 
sification ) usually take the verbal nouns specified for them in the 
chart. A few, however, take unpredictable shapes of which the most com¬ 
mon is FafaaL. Examples ; darri s ' to teach': tadr i i s , Fiadd id 'to spe¬ 
cify': tafidiid , tawwar 'to develop, to advauice (something)’: tatwiir , 
rabba 'to rear’: tarbiya , kassar 'to smash': taksiir , ?atti I 'to slaugh¬ 
ter': ta?t i i I , but kal I im 'to talk to (someone)': kalaam . 

Some derived verbs ( especially those of Measure II which denote 
causation and those which eure associated with Standard Arabic ) take 
the verbal nouns specified in the chart as well as the verbal nouns 
of the source verbs ( when such source verbs exist ). Derived verbs 
with no corresponding source verbs take the verbal noxins specified in the 
chart. 

The specific inplications of these general statements are as follows : 

(a) Verbs of the measure i staFayTaL take the verbal nouns of the cor¬ 
responding Measure X verbs ( which explains why the measure istaFaT^aL 

is excluded from the chart ). Thus istaravvaFi 'to rest' takes the verbal 
noun of i staraafi 'to rest', namely, ! st i raaha . Some verbs of the measure 
istaFaTTaL have no source verbs of Measure X; notwithstanding this fact, 
such verbs take the verbal nouns which would be tedcen by Measure X verbs 
( e.g., istafiammam 'to tedce a bath': i st i Fimaam ). 

(b) Derived verbs with it- usually take the verbal nouns of the soxirce 
verbs : 

(i) Verbs of the measure^" itFa?aL almost always tcike the verbal 
nouns of the corresponding source verbs ( which explains the exclusion of 
itFa?aL from the chart ). Examples : itkatab 'to be written’: kitaaba , 
it?add 'to be counted': ?add , itSaaI 'to be carried': Seel , itbara 'to 

be sharpened': bary . 

(ii) Verbs of Measure V usually take the verbal nouns of the cor¬ 
responding Measure II verbs. Some Measure V verbs take the verbal nouns 
specified for them in the chart. These usually take, in addition, the 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


305 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


verbal nouns of the corresponding Measure I and Measure II verbs ( if 
such Measure I and Measure II verbs exist. ). Examples : it?aI Iim 'to 

learn'; ta?lIim » itfiaddid 'to be specified’; taftdlid > it?aww!d 'to be 
accustomed'; ta?w! id r Itrabba 'to be reared'; tarbiva > itmarrad 'to 
rebel'; tamarrud , itraddad 'to hesitate'; taraddud , itTazzlb 'to suffer'; 
ta^azzub or ta9ziib or ^azaab , ttYayyaC 'to change (intransitive) '; 
tayayyur or tayyiir , itkaI Iim ' to speak '; taka I Ium or kalaam . 

(iii) Verbs of Measure VI usually take the verbal nouns of Mecisure 
III. Some Measure VI verbs take the verbal nouns specified for them in 
the chart; these verbs usually teUce, in addition, the verbal nouns of the 
corresponding Measure III verbs ( if such Measure III verbs exist ). 

Exan^les ; 1t?aabi I 'to meet each other' ; mu?abl a , itbaara 'to conqpete 
with each other' ; mubaraat , it?aami I 'to deal with each other'; mu?amla , 
itdaawa 'to receive medical treatment'; mudawaat , itnaazi I 'to relinquish'; 
tanaazu I , (traakum 'to pile up'; taraakum , itmaada 'to go to extremes'; 
tamaadi , itbaadiI 'to exchange with each other' ; tabaaduI or mubadI a . 

(c) Other derived verbs usually take the verbal nouns specified for 
them in the chart; they may also take the verbal nouns of the correspond¬ 
ing source verbs ( when such source verbs exost ). Examples ; fiaakim 
'to try (in court)'; mufiakma , raasiI 'to correspond with'; murasla , 
baasib 'to call (someone) to account'; mufiasba or fiisaab , gaaI is 'to sit 
with (someone)’; mugalsa or guluus , aryam 'to force'; iryaam , adrak 'to 
realize'; idraak , anzar 'to threaten'; inzaar , askan 'to allocate living 
quarters to (someone)'; fskaan , axrag 'to let out'; ixraag or xuruug , 
insaraf 'to depart'; insiraaf , inTaTad '(for a meeting) to be held'; 
in?i?aad or ?a?d , inkasar 'to break (intransitive)'; ink!saar or kasr , 
InfataFi 'to open (intransitive) '; Inf itaaFt or fatfi , intaha 'to end (in¬ 
transitive) '; intihaa? or nihaaya. 

The verbal nouns of quadriliteral verbs are as follows ; 

(1) Prom Measure I verbs, the verbal noun is Fa?i/aiia ; e.g., targim 'to 
translate'; targama , dafirag 'to roll (something)'; dafiraga , margafS 'to 
swing (someone)'; margaRa . 

(2) Measure II verbs take the verbal nouns of the corresponding source 
( i.e.. Measure I ) verbs; e.g., iddafirag 'to roll (intransitive)'; daRraga , 



EGyPTIM ARABIC 


IM 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


ittarqim 'to be translated'; targama , itmargaF 'to swing (intransitive)'; 
margaFa . 

(3) From Measure IV verbs, the verbal noun is iFTiTJaaL ( where the 
two medial L's stand for different consoneuats ); e.g., itma?ann 'to be 
re-assiired': itmi?naan , igSa9arr 'to shudder'; iq§iyraar . 

*** »** *** 


VERBAL NOUNS : VERIVING THE "NOUN OF QUALITY" 


The ending -iyya is added to certain nouns—^many of which are verbal 
nouns—to produce the form known as "the noun of q\iality". The noun of 
quality expresses the designation of the source noun as a general con¬ 
cept , a doctrine, a quality, or a totality; the noim of quality is there¬ 
fore similar to English nouns which end in -ism or -ity . In the exan^des 
below, the source noun precedes the colon ; 


Suyuu? 
iStiraak 
wuguud 
insaan 
iImasiift 


'spread' 

'participation' 
'existence' 
'human being' 
'Christ* 


Suyu?iyya 
iStirakiyya 
wugudiyya 
insaniyya 
masihiyya 


* communism' 
'socialism' 

'existentialism' 

'humanity' 

'Christianity' 


Not all nouns can yield the noun of quality, and no general rule delin¬ 
eates the nouns which can. The student must therefore learn the nouns of 
quality as items. 

Singular nouns of quality are feminine. 


*** *** *** 


VERBAL NOUNS : VERIVING THE NOUN Of SINGLE OCCURRENCE 

Certain nouns designate an event which has taken place once. An example 
is the underlined word in the following sentence ; 


simiTt sarxa waraaya. 


' 1 heard a scream behind me.' 




EGVPTJAN ARABIC 


307 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


Such nouns axe formed by adding the feminine suffix ^ to verbal nouns. 

It must be emphasized that not every verbal noun can yield a noun of 
single occurrence, and that no infallible rule can be given to determine 
which verbal nouns yield the noun of single occurrence. The following 
are helpful—though not fool-proof—guidelines : 

1. Most nouns of single occiurrence are derived from the verbal nouns 
Fa?I. and taF?iiL. Exan^jles : ramya 'a throw', taxriIma 'a shortcut', 
ta?wiira 'an injury'. 

2. Verbal nouns other than Fa?L and taF?iiL rarely yield the noun of 
single occurrence. 

Some noims of single occrurrence have acquired a semantic extension in 
addition to the basic designation. Thus akia is not only 'an act of eat¬ 
ing' but also 'a meal'; likewise, darba is not only 'an act of striking' 
but also 'a plague'. 

All nouns designating a single occurrence form the plural by the addi¬ 
tion of -aat . The d\ial is formed by the addition of -een ; 


Singular 


Plural 


Dual 


ramya 'a throw' ramyaat 

akIa 'a meal' akiaat 

taxriima 'a shortcut' taxrimaat 


ramyiteen 
akliteen 
taxrimteen 


*** *** *** 


t/ERBAL mm : 6EM0ER Of THE SINGULAR FORM 


A singular verbal noun ( whether abstract or concrete ) is usually mas¬ 
culine unless it ends in Thus of the following forms, the ones on 

the left are masculine emd the ones on the right are feminine : 


?ard 'an offer' 

Tama I 'a task' 
tasriifi 'a permit' 
intiqaad 'a criticism' 
darb 'beating' 


diraasa 'an academic discipline' 
kitaaba 'a writing' 
mu?abla 'an interview' 
istigaaba 'a response' 
i baada 'exterminating' 









EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


308 


REPERENCE GRAMMAR 


VERBAL NOUNS : MEANING 

A verbal noun names the action designated by the corresponding verb. 

For example, the verbal noun diraasa 'studying' names the action which is 
designated by the verb daras 'to study'. Similarly, the verbal noun 
aki 'eating' names the action which is designated by the verb aka I 'to 
eat'. 

The meaning of a verbal noun can be either abstract or concrete, as is 
evident from conparing the underlined words in the following sentences : 

(1) i I kitaab da miS kuwayyis. 'This book is not good.' 

il?akl ?abl innoom mubaaSaratan 'Eating immediately before sleep- 
mudirr. ing is haurmful.' 

The noun i I kitaab denotes a discrete object with one unit of lexical 
meaning; for this reason, (a) it can be counted, and (b) it is equally 
capable of being definite or indefinite. In this sense, iIkitaab is 
concrete. That countability is a distinctive characteristic of concrete 
nouns is self-evident; what may not be self-evident is the fact that un¬ 
restricted freedom to occur as either definite or indefinite is also a 
distinctive characteristic of concrete nouns. A noun is indefinite if 
it is ambiguous ( i.e., if it is likely to elicit the question "Which 
one?" ) and definite if it is unambiguous ( i.e., if it is not likely to 
elicit the question "Which one?" ). It is about concrete entities that 
we normally ask the question "Which one?" and it is therefore the nouns 
designating such entities that may be either definite or indefinite. 

( For fvurther comments on the meaning of definiteness, see ; Definite 
Article : Meaning ). 

The verbal noun il?akl has a generic meaning ( 'eating in general' ) 
rather than a discrete referent, emd for that reason (a) it caiuiot be 
counted, and (b) it is usually definite. In this sense Il?akl and verbal 
nouns like it are abstract. 

The abstract meaning discussed above constitutes the "basic" designation 
of verbal noims. In addition to that meaning, some verbal nouns have 
acquired concrete meanings; for example, diraasa can be used with abstract 
meaning, 'studying', but it can also be used with the concrete meaning 




EGVVriAN ARABIC 


309 


REFEREMCE GRAMMAR 


'a discipline'; again, ?amaI can be used with the abstract meaning 'work¬ 
ing', but it also can be used with the concrete meaning 'a job.' 

Verbal nouns differ from verbs in that the latter designate tense and 
aspect while the former do not; this fact is evident from the difference 
in meaning between the following sentences : 


I ibs ilfustaan da 9eeb. 
innik bitiIbisi Ifustaan da 
Teeb. 

innik fiatiIbisi ifustaan da 
?eeb. 

innik iibisti Ifustaan da ?eeb 


'Wearing this dress is shameful.' 

'The fact that you wear this dress 
is sh 2 uneful.' 

'The fact that you will wear this 
dress is shameful.' 

'The fact that you wore this dress 
is sheuaeful.' 


*** *** *** 


VERBAL NOUNS : NUMBER 


Abstract verbal nouns are not countable : they are considered gramma¬ 
tically singular, ^md-they can be made neither dual nor plural. Concrete 
verbal nouns, on the other hand, have singular, dual and plural forms. 

In the first sentence below, the underlined word is an abstract verbal 
noun; in the other four, the imderlined words are concrete verbal nouns : 


itta?Iiim fissiyar zayy inna?S 
?a Ifiagar. 

kaanu biynaadu b- ta?liim 
yariib. 

kaanu biynaadu b- ta?limeen 
mil ta?liim waafiid. 
kaanu biynaadu b-taiat ta^aIiim . 
itta?aIiim illi biynaadu biiha 
yariiba. 


'Training (a person) in (his) 
childhood is similar to engraving 
on stone.' (i.e., one never for¬ 
gets what he learns as a child.) 

'They preached a strange doctrine.' 

'They preached two doctrines, not one. 

'They preached three doctrines.' 

'The doctrines they preach are 
strange.' 


Concrete verbal nouns of Measure I triliterals aure divisible into two 



EGYPTIM ARABIC 


310 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


groups : 

1. Those which have sound plurals? most of the singular verbal nouns 
in this group 2 u:e feminine forms ending in -a ; 


Plural 


kitaaba 'a writing' kitabaat 

diraasa 'an academic discipline' dirasaat 


2. Those which have broken plurals; the broken plurals in question . 
cemnot be predicted with certainty and must therefore be learned as items. 
It is to be noted, however, that the plural of Fa is often Fu?uuL and 
that the plural of Fa?aL is often aF?aaL : 


Singular 


Plural 


fard 'an assumption' furuud 
Tard 'an offer' Turuud 
Yamal 'a task, a job' aYmaal 


The concrete verbal nouns of derived triliterals are usually formed by 
adding the sound feminine plural suffix -aat to the singular form : 


Singular 


Plural 

tasrliF 

'a permit' 

tasrifiaat 

taYbiir 

'an expression 

taYbiraat 

•taYri if 

'a definition' 

taYrifaat 

muYabla 

'an interview' 

mu?ablaat 

fiiwaar 

'a discourse' 

fiiwaraat 

iqraar 

'an admission' 

iqra raat 

iyraa? 

'an incitement' 

iyraYaat 

tamanni 

'a wish' 

tamanniyyaat 

tatawwur 

'a development' 

tatawwuraat 

tanaaqud 

'a contradiction' 

tanaqudaat 

infigaar 

'an explosion' 

infigaraat 

int iqaad 

'a criticism' 

intiqadaat 

iYtiraaf 

'a confession' 

i Yt i rafaat 


EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


311 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


isti?maa 1 

'a usage' 

isti?ma1aat 

istigaaba 

'a response' 

istigabaat 

In addition to the sound plural in 

-aat, mamy (though not all) verbal 

nouns of Measure II triliterals have 

the broken plural taFa?iiL ; 

Singular 


Plural 

tasri ifi 

'a permit' 

tasrifiaat tasariifi 

taYbiir 

'an expression' 

taTbiraat ta^abiir 

ta?riif 

'a definition' 

taTrifaat talari if 

The plural in - 

aat and the plvural taFa?iiL are usually interchangeable; 

sometimes, however, they occur with different designations ; thus 

ta?a1iim means 

'doctrines, teachings' 

while ta?l imaat means 'instructions 

Some verbal nouns take one plural but 

not the other; for example, the 

plural of tanbiih 'admonition* is tanbihaat but not *tanabilh. 

The dual is 

formed by adding the 

suffix -een to the singular form : 

Singular 


Dtial 

fard 

'an assumption' 

fardeen 

?ama 1 

'a task, a job' 

?ama1een 

kitaaba 

'a writing' 

kitabteen 

diraasa 

'an academic discip- 

dipasteen 

tasri ifi 

, .. line' 

'a penait 

tasri fieen 

isti9maa i 

*a usage' 

i st i Tma 1 een 

targama 

'a translation' 

targamteen 

etc. 




Concrete verbal nouns from quadriliteral verbs axe rare, 2 uid of the ones 
that do occur Fa^LaLa is the most common. The plural of FaTLaLa is 
Fa?aaLiL ; e.g., tarqama 'a translation' ; taraaqim . 

ititit itifk "kick 


VERBAL NOUNS : SYNTACTIC USAGE 


Verbal nouns occur in the slots where other nouns occur; thus a verbal 





EGVmAN ARABIC 


312 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


noun may be used as subject of an equational sentence, subject of a verb, 
object of a verb, object of a preposition, predicate of an equational 


sentence, the first or second term 

iI?amaI mil 9eeb. 

!tta?lIim yihazzib iI?ax1aa?. 
ana mil faahim ittaybiir da. 
t i ?ibt min I!ntizaar . 
iIwIfida yibaada . 
kutr ittikraar yi?a11im 
iIfiumaar. 

Verbal Noun as the First Term of a 


of a construct phraise, etc. 

"Work is not shameful.' 

'Education refines one's character.' 
'I do not understand this expression 
'I am tired of waiting.' 

'Solitude is a form of worship.' 
'Much repetition teaches (even) a 
donkey.' 

Construct Phrase 


A verbal noun may occur as the first term of a constmct phrase. In 
this context, the second member may be the subject or the object of the 
source sentence. Consider the following : 

1. su?uut fariid fi11imtihaan 'Farid's failing the test upset me.' 

za99aIni. 

2. lurb i Ixamra liaraam. 'Drinking wine is unlawful.' 

In sentence 1., the underlined expression is derived from a sentence 
whose s\xbjeet is fari id ; 

fariid salat f i 11 itnt i fiaan. 'Farid failed the text.' 

In sentence 1 , then, the verbal noun su?uut 'failure' is in construct 
with the subject of the source sentence. 

In sentence 2 , the underlined expression is derived from a sentence 
whose direct object is iIxamra ; 

innaas biyilrabu Ixamra. 'People drink wine.' 

In sentence 2 , then, the verbal noun lurb 'drinking' is in construct 
with the direct object of the source sentence. 

The source sentence determines not only the construct phrase but also 
whether certain elements must co-occur with that phrase : 

1. If the source sentence contains no direct object, the verbal noun 
is in construct with the subject ; 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


313 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


fali nigifi. ‘All succeeded.' 

nagaaFi ?aI i farrafini. 'All's success pleased me.' 

2. If the source sentence contains a single direct object, the trans¬ 
formation is one of the following : 

(a) Either the subject or the object is omitted; the constituent which 
is not omitted becomes the second term of the construct phrase. 

(i) fariida b-tifttirim Tali. 'Farida respects Ali.' 

(ii) ifitiraam fariida imiS 'Farida's respect is not sur- 

mustayrab. prising.' 

(iii) iFifiraam Tali miS mustayrab. 'Respecting Ali is not surprising.' 

Notice that the construct phrase of (ii) omits the object of the source 
sentence : ifit iraam fari ida 'Farida's respect' does not indicate the 
recipient of respect; also notice that the construct phrase of (iii) omits 
the subject of the source sentence ; ifitiraam TaIi 'respecting Ali' does 
not indicate who respects Ali. 

It is clear from con^iaring (ii) and (iii) that phrases like i fit i raam 
fariida and iftti raam ?a I i would be ambiguous in the absence of the source 
sentence. When such phrases occur, the context must be relied on to 
resolve the ambiguity. 

(b) Neither the subject nor the object is omitted. The subject becomes 
the second member of the construct phrase, and the object idi optionally 
preceded by the preposition Ii- : 

samiir aka I iggibna. 'Samir ate the cheese.' 

aki samiir iggibna mazaTTalnii5. 'Samir's eating the cheese did 

not upset me.' 

aki samiir Iiggibna mazaTTaIniil. 'Samir's eating of the cheese did 

not upset me.' 

3. If the source sentence contains two objects, the transformation is 
one of the following; 

(a) No omission takes place. The verbal noun is placed in construct 
with the subject. The preposition I i- is prefixed to the indirect object, 
and this prepositional phrase is placed after the direct object. 




EGVVnM ARABIC 


314 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


far!id fallim ittalamiiz 
illuya lYarabiyya. 
tafliim far!id i I luya lYarabiyya 
littalamiiz fiaaga masimi?ti§ 
?anha abadan. 


Farid taught the students the 
Arabic lauigauge.' 

Faurid's teaching the Arabic lan¬ 
guage to the students is some¬ 
thing I never heard about.' 


(b) Omission is applied to the subject, the direct object, the indirect 
object, or any two of these : 

(i) If only the subject is omitted, the verbal noun enters into con¬ 
struct either with the direct object or with the indirect object. In 
the first case, the preposition i i- is prefixed to the indirect object. 

In the second case, Ii- is not used at all. 


vail Yallim ittalamiiz illuya 
I9arabiyya. 

taTliim illuya l?arabiyya 
littalamiiz See? kuwayyis. 
ta?liim ittalamiiz illuya 
ITarabiyya See? kuwayyis. 


'Ali taught the students the 
Arabic langviage.' 

'Teaching the Arabic language to 
the students is a good thing.' 
'Teaching the students the Arabic 
language is a good thing.' 


(ii) if the subject is retained and only one object is omitted, the 
verbal noun is placed in construct with the subject. The preposition I 1- is 
optionally added to the retained object ( addition being the norm ). 


?ali ?allim ittalamiiz illuya 
ITarabiyya. 

ta?liim ?aIi (Ii-) Iluya 
l?arabiyya See? garniil. 
ta?liim ?ali (Ii-) ttalamiiz 
See? garniiI. 

(iii) If the subject and one of 
noun is placed in construct with the 

ta?liim illuya l?arabiyya sa?b. 
ta?liim ittalamiiz sa?b. 


'Ali taught the students the 
Arabic language.* 

'Ali's teaching the Arabic lan¬ 
guage is a good thing.' 

'Ali's teaching the students is a 
good thing.' 

the objects are omitted, the verbal 
retained object. 

'Teaching the Arabic language is 
difficult.' 

'Teaching the students is difficult. 




*** 


*** 




EGYPTIM ARABIC 


315 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


VOCATIVE PARTICLE 


A particle introducing a noun referring to the person addressed. There 
is one such particle in Egyptian Arabic ; /ya/ - /a/ 'hey . . 


ya tnFiamtnad 
ya Rabi!bi 
ya ustaaz 


'Hey Mohannnedl' 
'Dear!' 

'Mr.:' 


*** *** *** 


VOICING 


Refers to the vibration of the vocal cords or lack thereof during the 
production of a sound. A voiced consonant is one which is accon^sanied 
by vibration of the vocal cords, for example, /v/ in the English word 
"vine". A voiceless consonant is one which is produced without any 
accompanying vibration of the vocal cords, for exan 5 )le, /f/ in the Eng¬ 
lish word "fine". 

The difference between voicing and voicelessness can be felt strongly 
if one covers one's ears with one's hainds, then pronounces English "fine" 
and "vine", paying attention to the /f/ emd /v/. 


EA Voiceless Consonants 


EA Voiced Counterparts 


P 

t 

t 

k 

q 

? 

f 

s 

s 

S 

X 

fi 

h 


b 

d 

d 

g 


V 

z 

z 

5 

Y 
? 



EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


316 


REFEREWCE GRAMMAR 


Voiced consonants /mn I [ rrwy/. 

*** **★ 


VOWELS 


A vowel is a sound produced by unobstructed air passage through the oral 
cavity. 

To produce a vowel sound, the tongue is arched High, Mid or IjOw in the 
mouth. The axching of the tongue is either toward the Front of the palate 
or the Back . Thiis, we describe the vowels in terms of these parameters. 

We can, for example, say that /]/ is a high front vowel. 

The position of the lips, whether unrounded as in /i ,a/ or rounded as 
in /u,o/ is also in^ortant in describing vowel sounds. 

Vowels are voiced; that is, vowels are produced with vibration of the 
vocal cords. 

Egyptian Arabic Vowels 


Short Long 



' ■ 

Front 

Back 

Front 

Back 

High 

i 

u 

i i 

uu 

Mid 

e 

o 

ee 

oo 

Low 

a 


aa 



Arabic vowels present few difficulties to the learner. They are similar 
to the English vowels. The short vowels /i,u/ are like English 'hit' and 
•put', /a/ is the vowel of 'cot' next to emphatic consonants, and some¬ 
what like the [a] of 'fat' elsevrtiere. /e, o/ are not very common, /e/ is 
pronounced almost like the vowel of English 'bet*^ and /o/ almost like 
that of English 'soap'. When short /e,o/ occur, it is sometimes difficult 
for a non-native speaker to distinguish them from short /i,u/ respectively, 
particularly in rapid speech; e.g. : 


b4tna 

'our house' 

bTtna 

'we spent the night' 

?6tti 

• • 

'my room' 

?utti 

'my cat (m) ' 




EGVPTJAN ARABIC 


317 


INFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Fortunately, the occurrence of short /e,o/ is not common in Egyptian Ar2Q3io. 

The long vowels /i1,uu,oo,ee/ are like those in English "feet", "food", 
"boat" and "bait", respectively. It must be mentioned that long vowels 
in Arabic are not glided. A glide is a transitional sound produced when 
the vocal organs shift from the eurticulation of one sound to the articu¬ 
lation of another sound. 

Notes on EA Vowels ; 

a) In EA, words or utterances never begin with a vowel, whether short or 
long. In all cases where a student hears what he thinks is an initial 
vowel, it is always /?/ + vowel. 

b) Short vowels occur stressed and unstressed, medially and finally. 

c) Long vowels occur only stressed. 

d) EA does not permit more than one long vowel in a word; in the case of 
two long vowels ( resulting from morphological suffixation ), the first 
vowel is shortened and stress shifts to the second; e.g. ; 

/Saalu/ 'they carried' + /-u/ 'it (m)' —J 

/laaluu/ —^ /Saluu/ 'they carried it (m)' 


I/OWEIS : 


/-a/ + 



ititlt ititit -kitlt 


Some feminine singulzur noims end in /-a/. When the sound plural suffix 
/-aat/ is added, the /-a/ in question is deleted. When the dual suffix 
/-een/ is added, the /-a/ in question is replaced by /-t/ unless a sequence 
of three consonants would result { in which case replacement is by /-it/ ) 


mudarrisa 
mudarrisaat 
mudcirri Steen 


'a teacher (f)' 
'teachers (f)' 

'two teachers (f)' 

' a principal (f)' 
'principals (f)' 

'two principals (f)' 


nazra 

nazraat 

nazriteen 


*** 







EGVmAN ARABIC 


318 


REFBENCE GRAMMAR 


vcwELS : cotrmcnoN 

Note the difference between the masculine and feninine forms of the ad¬ 
jective Saatir , Satra - SatriIn 'clever*. This difference is the_result 
of the operation of two phonological rules in Eh. The first rule states 
that an vmstressed /!/ is elided if it precedes a consonant which is fol¬ 
lowed by a vowel which may or may not be across a word boundary (symbolized 
by #} or a morpheme boundary (symbolized +). Another way of stating the 
Vowel Elision rule is : 

f —> 0 / _C (^j]) V 

This rule is applied when the feminine morpheme /-a/ is added to the mas¬ 
culine form of the adjective as follows : 

iaatir + -a —> laatra 

A second rule must now be applied in order to produce the feminine form 
of the adjective as it is actually pronounced. This rule states that a 
long vowel is shortened if it precedes two consonants, or if it is un¬ 
stressed. Another way of stating the Vowel Shortening rule is : 

W 

When the Vowel Shortening rule is applied to the output of the Elision 
rule the result is the feminine form of the adjective as it is acttially 
pronounced : 

Saatra —h §atra 
• ^ • 

other instances of the s^plicaticsi of these rules can be seen in the 
following paradigms : 



EGVmAN ARABIC 


319 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


/bitaa?/ in contolnation with pronominal suffixes : 


bttaa? 

1 

blta?t 

1 

bltuu? 

1 

my 

bitaa? 

ak 

bita?t 

ak 

bituu? 

ak 

your (m) 

bttaa? 

Ik 

blta?t 

Ik 

bltuu? 

ik 

your (f) 

bitaa? 

u 

blta?t 

u 

bituu? 

u 

his 

bita? 

ha 

btta?lt 

ha 

bltu? 

ha 

her 

bita? 

na 

blta?lt 

na 

bitu? 

na 

our 

blta? 

kum 

bita?It 

kum 

bltu? 

kum 

your (p) 

bita? 

hum 

, blta?lt 

hum 

bitu? 

hum 

their 


Notice the elision of /t/ in /bltaa?!t/ before pronominal suffixes begin¬ 
ning with a vowel. Also note the instances of vowel shortening. 

Conjugation of /?aaS/ (F) *to live* ; 



Perfect 

Imperfect 

Zmperati' 

huwwa 

?aa§ 

biy?iiS 


hiyya 

?aa§lt 

blt?li5 


humma 

?aa§u 

biy?ii2u 


inta 

?iSt 

bit?ii§ 

?1 IS 

inti 

?lSti 

bit?iill 

?iiSi 

Intu 

?lStu 

blt?n5u 

?ii§u 

ana 

?lSt 

ba?ii§ 


Ifina 

?iSna 

bin?ilS 



Notice that /?aa§-/ is the form used for the third person ms, fs and p in 
the perfect. /?{{§-/ is used with all other persons in the perfect; /?ii§-/ 
in in^rfect and ii!^>erative forms. Also notice the shortening of /It/ 
when a suffix beginning with a consonant is added. 

When two long vowels occur in the same word as a result of suffixation, 
stress is shifted to the final long vowel, and then the Vowel Shortening 
rule is applied to the first long vowel : 

?4alu 'they sud* + -uh 'it (m)' —4 
?aaIuuh —^ 

?aIuuh 


•** 


*** *** 




EGyPTJAN ARABIC 


320 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


mELS : ELISION AT WORP BOUNDARIES TO AVOW VOWEL SEQUENCES 

Vowel sequences do not occur in EA.* When deletion of am elidible 
glottal stop (q.v.) would otherwise result in a sequence of two short 
vowels, one at the beginning of a word and the other at the end of the 
preceding word, elision takes place in the manner specified below : 

1. The final vowel of the first word is elided if it is /i/- 

2. Otherwise, the initial vowel of the second word is elided. 

/nifsi/ + /?aruufi/ = [nifsi] + [aruufi] = [nifs aruufi] 'I long to go.* 

/ma9a/ + /?ibni/ = [ma9a] + [ibni] = [maTa bni] 'with my son* 

when the deletion of an elidible glottal stop would otherwise result in 
two adjacent vowels of which one is long and the other is short, the 
short vowel is elided ; 

/§afuu/ + /?imbaarlFi/ = [iafuu] + [imbaarifi] = [Safuu mbaariFi] 

'they saw him yesterday* 

/sufnaa/ + /?imbaariF)/ = [§ufnaa] + [imbaarifi] = [Sufnaa mbaarifi] 

*we saw him yesterday* 

/luftii/ + /?imbaarifi/ = [luftli] + [imbaarifi] = [luftii mbaarifi] 
'you (fs) saw him yesterday* 

* In this book, each of the symbols aa , ii and uu stands for a single 
long vowel rather than a sequence of vowels. { Other systems of trans¬ 
cription use £, T and ^ to represent the long vowels of EA. ) 

itifit itiHt ita* 

VObilELS : ELISION OF IM AND /u/ FROM WORD-FINAL -c^c 

If unstressed, the vowel of the word-final sequence “C^C is elided in 
two situations ; 

1. When the sequence is pronoionced in close associaiton with a follow¬ 
ing word which begins with a vowel : 

/madaaris/ + /ilfiukuuma/ = [madars ilfiukuuma] 'public schools* 

2. When the sequence is followed by a prefix which begins with or con- 



EGVFTJAN ARABIC 


321 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


sists of a vowel : 

/waa?if/ + /-iin/ = [wa?fiin] 'standing (p)' 

/faahim/ + /-a/ = [fahma] 'understands (fs) ' 

The elision in question does not take place when it would result in a 
cluster of three consoneuits ( such a cluster is not permissible in EA ) : 

/yimsik/ + /ilkitaab/ = [yimsik ilkitaab] 'he holds the book' 

/yimsik/ + /-u/ = [yimsiku] 'he holds it (m)' 

*** *** *** 

l/OOCLS : ELISION OF /!/ ANV /u/ FROM WORD-INITIAL c'c- 

If unstressed, the vowel of the word-initial sequence C^C- is elided in 
two situations : 

1. When the sequence is pronotmced in close association with a preceding 
word which ends in a vowel ; 

/inta/ + /bitidris/ = [inta btidris] 'you (ms) study' 

2. When the sequence is preceded by a prefix which ends in a vowel : 

/fia-/ + /tikallimu/ = [fiatkal I imu] 'she will talk to him' 

The elision in question does not take place if it would result in a 
cluster of three consoneuits ( such a cluster is not permissible in EA ) i 

/inta/ + /bitruufi/ = [inta bitruufi] 'you (ms) go' 

/fia-/ + /tiktibu/ = [fiatiktibu] 'she will write it (m)' 

**<* ifkit 


VOWELS : EXTRA 

Consonant clusters in EA comprise no more thcui two segments. When a 
sequence of three consonants would otherwise occur, a vowel is added be¬ 
tween the second and the third consonants; this is true not only in the 
individual word, but across word boundaries as well. 

1. When, in a sequence of two words, the first word ends in two consonants 




EGVPTJAN ARABIC 


322 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


and the second begins with a consonant, a vowel is added to the end of the 
first word; the vowel is a variant of /!/ which is usually shorter and 
more lax than the other variants. In the following example, the extra 
vowel is represented by a raised j_ ; 

/iuft/ 'I saw' 

/raagi I/ 'a man’ 

[suft' raagil] 'I saw a man.' 

Notice the difference in pronunciation between [5uft* raagil] 'I saw a 
man' and [iuftl raagil] 'You (fs) saw a man': the final vowel of [Iuft'] 
is pronounced as a shorter and more lax soxind than the final vowel of 
[lufti]. The raised is often referred to as the helping vowel . 

Since its graphic representation is totally redundant, the helping vowel 
is not, as a rule, indicated by the script. 

2. When the addition of a suffix to a word would otherwise result in a 
sequence of more than two consonants, a vowel is inserted between the 
second and the third consonants. The vowel in question is /u/ before 
/-hum/ 'them' and /-kum/ 'you (p)’, /a/ before /-ha/ 'her', and /i/ other¬ 
wise. This extra vowel is stressed if required by the stress rules. 
Illustrations : 


/ka1b/ 
[kalbuhum] 
[kaibukum] 
[kaibaha] 
[kalbfna] 


'dog' 

'their dog' 
'your (p) dog' 
'her dog' 

'our dog' 


/gibt/ '1 brought' 

[gibtiJhum] *1 brought them' 

[gibtukum] 'I brought you (p)' 

[gibtaha] '1 brought her' 

[gibtflu] '1 brought (something) for him' 


/kalt/ 'I ate' 

[ma-kaIti-1] 'I did not eat' 


/9add/ 

[ma-?addi-l] 


'he counted* 

'he did not count' 


Statement 2. above has the following exception : when a suffix which 
begins with or consists of a consonant 2 md which marks agreement with the 
subject is added to a doubled verb stem, /ee/ is inserted before the 
suffix : 

'he cursed' 

'I cursed* 

’we cursed' 


/sabb/ 

/sab beet'/ 
/sabbeena'/ 


*** 


*** 





EGVPnAN ARABIC 


323 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


VOWELS : LENGTHENING OF SHORT l/OWELS 

The final vowel of a form is lengthened when that form receives a 
suffix beginning with or consisting of a consonauit : 


istanna 

'he waited' 

istannaani 

'he waited for me' 

f i 

•in' 

f iik 

'in you' 

maTna 

'meaning' 

ma?naaha 

'its meaning' 

daYa 

'he invited' 

mada?aa§ 

'he did not invite 


The major exceptions to this rule are listed below : 

1. Feminine singular nouns ending in /a/ when they enter into construct 
with a pronominal suffix. In this context, the /a/ is replaced by /-it/. 

madrasa 'school' 

madras it-na 'our school' 

2. The preposition Tala 'on' when combined with any pronominal suffix : 


9a1ay-ya 

'on 

me' 

9a1ee-na 

'on 

us 

9a1ee-k 

'on 

you (ms) ' 

9alee-ki 

'on 

you (fs) ' 

9alee-kum 

'on 

you (p)' 

9a1ee-h 

'on 

him' 

9a lee-ha 

'on 

her' 

9a1ee-hum 

'on 

them' 


3. Prepositions ending in /i/ ^en combined with the pronominal suffix 
-ya 'me'; e.g., the prepositions JM_ 'in', bi- 'by means of, and I i- 'for' 
are combined with -ya in the following manner : 

fiy-ya 
biy-ya 
Iiy-ya 



EGVmM ARABIC 


324 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


4. Verb forms ending in /i/ or /a/ when combined with an agreement suf¬ 
fix. In this context, a verb-final /i/ is either lengthened or replaced 
by /ee/, while a verb-final /a/ is replaced by /ee/. The verbs nisi 'to 


forget' and 

daTa 'to 

invite' may be used as 

examples : 

(ana) 

n i s 1 i -t 

n i see-t 

daTee-t 

(ifina) 

nisii-na 

nisee-na 

daTee-na 

(inta) 

nisii-t 

nisee-t 

daTee-t 

(inti) 

n i s i i -t i 

nisee-ti 

daTee-ti 


*** *** *** 


VOWELS ; REPLACEMENT OF ^ IN NOUN CONSTRUCTS 

Many feminine singular noxins end in -a . When such nouns enter into 
construct with a following form, the final replaced by ^ unless a 

sequence of three consonants would result ( in which case replacement is 
by ) : 

maktaba 

maktabt iggam9a 
maktabit gam9itna 
saaTa 
saTt i 
saTitna 
saa?it Tali 

*** *** *** 


'a library' 

'the university libreUTr' 
'our university library' 
'a watch' 

'my watch' 

'our watch' 

'Ali's watch' 


VOWELS : SHORTENING OF LONG VOWELS 

In general, a long vowel does not occur (a) before two consonants 
which are not separated or preceded by a break in speech, (b) prior to 
another long vowel in the same word, or (c) unstressed. Therefore, /W/ 
and /ee/ are replaced by /i/, /uu/ and /oo/ are replaced by /u/, and /aa/ 
is replaced by /a/ in the following situations s 



EGVPTJAN ARABIC 


325 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


1. When the addition of a suffix would cause the long vowel in question 
to occur before a cluster of two consonants : 


/yigiib/ 
[yigibha] 


'he brings' 

'he brings her' 


/beet/ 

[bitha] 


'house' 

'her house' 


/Tuyuun/ 

[Yuyunhum] 


'eyes' 

'their eyes' 


/too?/ 

tfu?na] 


'adxjve' 
'above us' 


/gaab/ 'he brought' 

[gabni] 'he brought me' 


2. When two consecutive words are pronounced in close association, pro¬ 
vided that (a) the first word ends in -WC and the second word begins 
with C-, or provided that (b) the first word ends in -W and the second 
word begins with CC- : 


/mariid/ 

'sick' 

[marid xaalis] 

'very sick' 

/saYteen/ 

'two hours' 

[saTtm wi nuss] 

'two hours euid a half 

/magnuun/ 

'crazy' 

[magnun rasmi] 

'unquestionably crazy' 

/koom/ 

'a pile' 

[kum basal] 

'a pile of onions' 

/igtimaaT/ 

'a meeting' 

[igtima? muhimm] 

'an important meeting' 

/fiayibni i/ 

'he will build it' 

[fiayibni fmasr] 

'He will build it in Egypt.' 

/rig lee/ 

'his legs' 

[rig 1 1 bt i rt i Tl] 

•His legs are shaking.' 




EGVVTJAN ARABIC 


326 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


/Fiattuu/ 

•they put it' 

[fiattu fdurg] 

'They put it in a drawer.' 

/banaa/ 

'he built it' 

[bana mfaaarifi] 

•He built it yesterday.' 

3. When an affix containing a long vowel is added, since an EA word is 

usually pronounced with 

one and only one long vowel : 

/mill/ 

'a mile' 

[mileen] 

'two miles' 

/beet/ 

'a house' 

[biteen] 

'two houses' 

/magnuun/ 

'crazy (ms)' 

[magnuniin] 

'crazy (p)' 

/koom/ 

'a pile' 

[kumeen] 

'two piles' 

4. When the addition 

of a suffix shifts the stress away from the long 

vowel in question : 


/Fi f i 1 a/ 

'a trick' 

[Fii 1 ftha] 

'her trick' 

/beeda/ 

'am egg' 

[bidftha] 

'her egg' 

/suura/ 

'a picture' 

[surftna] 

'our picture' 

/koora/ 

'a ball' 

[kurfthum] 

'their ball' 

/dlyaana/ 

'a religion' 

[diyanfthum] 

'their religion' 


Standard Arabic has a sound system which differs in m£my ways from the 
sound system of EA. Consequently, many Standard Arabic words do not con¬ 
form to the above rules. When such words are borrowed into EA, their 
Standard pronunciation may be altered to achieve conformity with the EA 
rules. Alternatively, those words may retain the St 2 mdard pronunciation 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


327 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


in spite of the EA rules. The first option is commonly exercised in in¬ 
formal situations, tdiile the second is commonly exercised in formal or 
semiformal situations. The following are some examples : 

Informal Pronunciation Formal or Semiformal Pronunciation 

xassa 'special (f)' xaassa 

isa?aat 'insults' isaa?aat 

niqabaat 'unions' niqaabaat 

isa?fthum 'their insult' isaa?fthum 

Since it is completely predictable, the shortening discussed above does 
not have to be indicated in the script. 

■kifit ititit it±ic 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


125 . 


INFERENCE GRAMMAR 


- W - 


ItiOJW STRUCTURE 

The Arab grammarians use the rcxst /P^l./ J*i 'to do' to describe the 
various noun or verb patterns (q.v.). This designation and symbolization 
of word structure is followed in every grammar of ClMsioal or Modem 
Standard Arabic. In applying this to Egyptian Arabic it is seen that the 
active participle ( See: Participles ) of the Meas:ire I (q.v.) verb 
/katab/ 'to write' which is /kaatib/ 'writer, writing' is said to be of 
the /Paa?lL/ pattern. Likewise, the verbal noun (q.v.) of the Measure II 
(q.v.) verb /baddal/ 'to change' is /tabdiil/ 'changing' which is said 
to be of the /taP^IiL/ pattern. 

*•* *** 


miTJNG SYSTEM 

standard Arabic is written and read from right to left. There are 
twenty-eight letters ( or twenty-nine if we count the hamzah /»/, 
glottal stop ) in the alphedset, of iidiich three are used for the vowels, 
/a,u, i/. The unconnected letters differ in form from the connected ones 
which, in turn, may vary in form, depending on whether they are initial, 
medial or final. Arabic dialects ( tdiether Eeistem, e.g., Egyptian and 
Lebanese, or Western, e.g., Moroccan ) may be written in this alphabet. 
It should be noted that the written script differs to some extent from 
the printed. There is a substantial difference between the Western and 





EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


310 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


Eastern handwriting which ffl 2 Uces it somewhat difficult for some Eastern 
Arabs to read Western manuscripts, there used to be slight differences 
between the Eastern and Western printed forms , e.g., the place and number 
of the dots in the letters that represent /f/ and /q/, e.g., 

Written and printed Eastern Arabic have : 

o /f/ J /q/ ; 

Written and printed Western Arabic had : 

/f/ /q/. 

Mow, however, both Eeistem and Western Arabic printers use the same letter 
type for the printing of Modem Standard Arabic. Also, Western handwriting 
is tending towards a greater conformity with the Eastern style. 

*** *** *** 



EGVFTIM ARABIC 


331 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


INPEX 


active participles: 
definiteness, 3 
derivation, 4-6 
gender of singular, 6-7 
meaning, 7-10 
number, 11-14 
syntactic usage, 14-15 
adjectival phrase introduced by 
bitaa? , 15-19 

adjectival use of participles, 

19-21 

adjective, 21 

agreement with nouns, 21-22 
attributive construction Cor 
noun-adjective phrases), 
22-25 

conparative and superlative, 
25-26 

functioning as predicate, 26-27 
gender, 27 

inflection for number and gen¬ 
der, 28-29 

joined by coordinating conjunc¬ 
tions, 29-30 

number and demonstratives, 30 
relative (see: nisba adjective) 
relative clauses, 30-31 
adverb, 31 
adverbs, 32-34 

manner, of, 34 
affix, 35 

agreement in construct phrases, 35 
allomorph, 35-36 
allophone, 36 
alveolar, 36 
ridge, 36 
alveopalatal, 37 
anaptyctic vowel (see: vowels, 
extra) 


anaptyxis, 37 
antecedent, 37-38 
Arabic, 38-39 

article, variation of definite (see: 
definite article, form; definite 
article, meaning) 
articulation, 39-41 

aspectual-temporal forms (see: verb, 
aspect; verb, tense) 
aspiration, 41 
assimilation, 41-42 

/-I-/ of definite article, 42-43 
obstruents, of, 43-44 
auxiliary (see: verb, auxiliaries) 
back vowel, 45 
bilabial, 45 

clause, relative (see: relative 
clauses with i I I t) 

clause, structure with demonstratives, 47 

cognate accusative construction, 48 

collective nouns, 49 

conditional sentences, 49-58 

conjoining, 58-59 

conjunctions, 59-74 

consonant, 74 

clear /!/ versus dark /[/, 75 
distribution, 75 
doiibled, 76 

emphatic (=velari 2 ed, =pharyn- 
gealized, =flat), 76-77 
plain, 77 

pronunciation, 77-79 
voiced / voiceless, 79 
construct phrase, 79-80 
construct state of nouns (see also: 

construct phrase), 80-81 
count plural novins (see: collective 
nouns) 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


332 


REFERENCE GRAmAR 


definite article; 
form, 83-84 
meaning, 84-85 

definite phrase (see; phrase ver¬ 
sus sentence) 

definiteness (see; agreement in 
construct phrases; definite 
aurticle, form; definite ar¬ 
ticle, meaning) 
demonstratives, 86 
dental, 86 

discontinuous morpheme, 87 
dropping of vowels (see; vowels; 

contraction) 
dual nouns", 87-88 

durative form (see; frequentative 
form) 

elision (see; vowels, contraction) 
ellipsis, 83-33 
anbedding, 93-94 

emphasis (see; consonant, emphatic), 
exclamations and oaths /itta?aggub 
wi 1 Fii 1 faan/, 94-95 
exhortative particle, 95 
feminine noun in construct, 97 
flap, 97 

form versus function, 98 
frequentative form, 98 
frequentative particle, 99 
fricative, 99 
front vowel, 99 

gender (see also: agreement in con¬ 
struct phrase; demonstratives; 
nisba adjectives; plural), 101 
presentational particles, 102 
glide, 102 
glottal, 102 
glottal stop, 102-104 
grapheme, 104 
haal ( fiaaI ), 105-106 
hard palate, 106 

helping vowel, (see; vowels, extra) 
high vowel, 106 

hollow verb (see; verb, classifica¬ 
tion by root type) 
imperative 

formation, 107-109 

forms in verb sequence, 109-112 

negative, 112-114 

responses, 114 

social usage, 115-116 

supplementary notes, 116-118 


indefinite phrase (see; phrase versus 
sentence) 

indefinite subject, 118-120 
independent personal pronouns (see; 

pronoun, personal) 
indicative mood, 120-121 
intensifier, 121 

interrogative (see; questions, alter¬ 
native; questions, information; 
questions, tags; questions, yes-or-no) 
interrogatives, 122 
labiodental, 123 
lateral, 123 
lexeme,; 123 
lexicon, 123 
linkage, 124 

long vowel (see; vowels) 
low vowel, 124 

manner adverbs (see; adverbs, manner) 

masdar , 125 

measures 

definition, 125-127 
intuitional reality of, 127-128 
mid vowel, 128 
minimal pair (see; phoneme) 
models, 128-130 
modifier, 130-131 
morpheme, 131 
morphophoneme, 131 
nasal, 133 
nasal cavity, 133 
negation 

ma- , ma-...-S , and miS-muS , 133-137 
negating a verbal noun, 138 
negating a verbal sequence, 138-139 
negating conditional sentences, 139 
negating the sequence modal + verb , 
140 

the form balaaS , 140-141 
the form wala (see; conjunctions) 
negative imperative (see; impera¬ 
tive, negative) 

negative particles (see: negation; ma- , 
ma-.. and mi§~mu§) 
nisba adjectives, 141-143 
nominalization: 

definition, 143-145 
without nominalizers; imperatives, 
145-146 

without nominalizers: 

146-148 


questions 


EGyPTIAN ARABIC 


333 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


nominalized sentences, possibility 
of replacing certain constitu¬ 
ents by a noun, 148-149 
nominalizer 

inn > 149-151 
koon / 151-152 
na.» 152-155 

noun (see also: collective nouns; 
dual nouns; gender; pluraJ.; 
verbal nouns), 155-156 
basic, 156 

human and non-human, 156-157 
character, of, 158 
instrument, of, 158 
profession or occupation, of, 

158- 159 
noun replacer ma 

difference from nominalizers, 

159- 160 

fiinction, 160+162 
meaning, 162-163 

noun, singular count (see: nume¬ 
rals; singular count nouns) 
numerals 

cardinal hundreds, indefinite 
construction, 163-164 
cardinal millions and billions, 
indefinite construction, 

164 

cardinal 'one', indefinite 
construction, 164-165 
cardinal numeral 'two', in¬ 
definite construction, 
166-167 

cardinals 3-10, indefinite 
construction, 167-168 
cardinals 11-19, indefinite 
.construction, 168 
cardinals 20,30, 40...90, 

indefinite construction, 

169 

cardinal thousands, indefinite 
construction, 169-170 
combinations of 1-99 with the 
cardinal hundreds, inde¬ 
finite construction, 170-171 
combinations of (1) the cardi¬ 
nal millions with numerals 
below one million and of 
(2) the cardinal billions 
with numerals below one 
billion, indefinite con¬ 
struction, 171-172 


nvimerals (cont' d.) 

combinations of the cardinal thou¬ 
sands with numerals below one 
thousand, indefinite construc¬ 
tion, 172-173 

combinations of units with the 

cardinal tens above 19, inde¬ 
finite construction, 173 
conjunction 'and' in numerical 
expressions, 173-174 
definite cardinal constructions, 
176-178 

fractions, 178-180 
ordinals 1-10, 180-182 
ordinals above 10, 183-184 
singular count nouns (SCN), 184 
oath (see; exclamations and oaths) 
obstruents, 185 

omission of vowels (see; vowels, con¬ 
traction) 

optative structures, 185-186 

oral cavity, 186 

organs of speech, 186-187 

palatal, 189 

particle, 189 

passive 

meaning, 189-190 
passivizable verbs, 190-192 
syntax, 193-194 
verb fonnation, 194-195 
passive participles 
definiteness, 195 
derivation, 196-199 
gender of singular, 199-200 
meeining, 200-202 
number, 203-205 
preceded by kaan , 206 
syntactic usage, 206-208 
pattern with roots, 208-209 
pharyngeal, 209 
pharynx, 209 
phoneme, 210 

phrase versus sentence, 210 
plural, 210-211 
possession, 211-213 
prefix, 213 

futurity, of, 213 
preposition, 213-214 
presentational particle (see also: 
adjectival phrase introduced by 
b itaa? ; possession), 214-215 
pronominal suffixes with certain par¬ 
ticles, 215 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


334 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


pronoun, 216-217 
personal, 217 
relative tsee; relative 
clauses with i11 1) 
separation, of, 218 
suffixes with aiixiliaries, 219 
suffixes with verbs, 219-220 
qactf (see; glottal stop) 
quadriliteral (= quadriradical 
verb, 221 
questions 

alternative questions, 221-222 
information questions, 222-228 
tags, 228-230 

yes-or-no questions, 230-231 
radicals, types, 233 
reduplicative verb, 233 
relative adjective (see: nxsba 
adjectives), 

relative clauses with i 11i , 234-235 
relative pronoun j||j (see: adjec¬ 
tive: relative clauses; rela¬ 
tive clauses with j11 j ) 
resonance cavities, 236 
root, 236-237 
script, 239-240 
Semitic, 240 
semi-vowel, 241 

sentence, equational (see: phrase 
versus sentence) 
sentence struct\ire, 241-252 
separation, pronoun of (see: 

pronoun of separation) 
sequence of verbs, 252 
shortening of vowels (see: vowels, 
contraction; vowels, shortening 
of long vowels) 
short vowels (see: vowels) 
slot, 253 
stem, 253 
stop, 254 
stress, 254-255 

suffix (see also: possession; pro¬ 
noun, personal; pronoun, suf¬ 
fixes with auxiliaries; pronoun 
suffixes with particles), 255 
/-a/—change in form to /-it/, 
255 

syllables, 255-256 
tap, 257 
tenseness, 257 


triliteral roots, types, 258 

unit nouns (see: collective nouns) 

uvular, 259 

velar, 261 

velum, 261 

verb: 

agreement with the subject, 261-268 
aspect, 268-269 
auxiliaries, 269-275 
bare form, 275 
citation form, 275-276 
classification by root type, 276- 
277 

kaan , 277-279 

measures: meanings of derived 
verbal measures, 279-287 
measures: primary and derived, 287 
quadriliterals classified by stem 
measure, 288 
subjunctive, 289-291 
tense, 291-292 

triliterals classified by stem 
measure, 292-298 
verbal nouns: 

definiteness, 299 
derivation, 300-306 
deriving the "noun of quality" 
from, 306 

deriving the noun of single occur¬ 
rence from, 306-307 
gender of the singiilar form, 307 
meaning, 308-309 
number, 309-311 
syntactic usage, 311-314 
vocative particle, 315 
voicing, 315-316 
vowels, 316-317 
/-a/ + /-aat/ 

/-een/, 317 
contraction, 318-319 
elision at word boundaries to 
avoid vowel sequences, 320 
elision of /!/ and /u/ from word- 
final CyC, 320-321 
elision of /!/ and /u/ from word- 
initial CyC-, 321 
extra, 321-322 

lengthening of short vowels, 323-324 
replacement of /-a/ in noun constructs 
324 

shortening of long vowels, 324-327 



EGyPTJM ARABIC 


word structure/ 
writing system. 


335 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


329 

329-330 




EGYPTIAN ARABIC 


337 


REFERENCE GRAMMAR 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abdel-Malek, Zaki N. The Closed-List Classes of Colloquial Egyptian Arabic , 

The Hague; Mouton, 1972, 

Abdel-Malek, Zaki N. Nimerals in Colloquial Egyptian Arabic , unpub. M.A. thesis, 
Georgetovm University, 1964. 

Abdel-Massih, Ernest T. Advanced Moroccan Arabic , Center for Near Easteim and 
North African Studies, University of Michigem, 1974. 

Abdel-Massih, Ernest T. An Introduction to Egyptian Arabic , Center for Near 
Eastern and North African Studies, University of Michigan, 1975. 

Abdel-Massih, Ernest T. An Introduction to Moroccan Arabic , Center for Near 
Eastern and North African Studies, University of Michigan, 1973 

Harrell, Richard S., Laila Y. Tewfik and George D. Selim. Lessons in Collo¬ 
quial Egyptian Arabic , Revised Edition, Georgetown University, 1963. 

Mitchell, T. F. Colloquial Arabic; The Living Language of Egypt , London, 1962. 

Wise, Hilary. A Transformational Grammar of Spoken Egyptian Arabic , Oxford, 

1975. 

Wright, William Ctrans;). A Grammar of the Arabic Language , Cambridge, 1964. 






Publications of the 

Center for Near Eastern and North African Studies 
University of Michigan 


BERBER (TAMAZIGHT) 

A COURSE IN SPOKEN TAMAZIGHT: MIDDLE ATLAS BERBER 
By ERNEST T, ABDEL-MASSIH. 1971. 

A REFERENCE GRAMMAR OF TAMAZIGHT: MIDDLE ATLAS BERBER 
By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1971. 

A COMPUTERIZED LEXICON OF TAMAZIGHT (BERBER DIALECT 
OF AYT SEGHROUCHEN) 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1971. 

MOROCCAN ARABIC 

A COURSE IN MOROCCAN ARABIC 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1970. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO MOROCCAN ARABIC 
By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1973. 

ADVANCED MOROCCAN ARABIC 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1974. 

EGYPTIAN ARABIC 

AN INTRODUCTION TO EGYPTIAN ARABIC 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1975. 

(Fourth Edition 1979) 

A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF EGYPTIAN ARABIC, Volume I: 
Conversations, Cultural Texts, Sociolinguistic Notes. 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH, A. FATHY BAHIG, EL-SAID 
BADAWI and CAROLYN KILLEAN. 1976. (Second 
Revised Edition 1978). 



EGYPTIAN ARABIC (CONTINUED) 


A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF EGYPTIAN ARABIC, Volume II: 
Proverbs and Metaphoric Expressions 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH, EL-SAID BADAWI, ZAKI N. 
ABDEL-MALEK and ERNEST N. McCARUS. 1978 (Preliminary 
Edition). 

A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF EGYPTIAN ARABIC, Volume III: 

A Reference Grammar of Egyptian Arabic 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH, ZAKI N. ABDEL-MALEK, EL-SAID 
BADAWI and ERNEST N. McCARUS. 1979 (Preliminary 
Edition). 

A COMPREHENSIVE STUDY OF EGYPTIAN ARABIC, Volume IV: 
Lexicon. Part I: Egyptian Arabic - English; Part II: 
English - Egyptian Arabic 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH, EL-SAID M. BADAWI, ZAKI N. 
ABDEL-MALEK and ERNEST N. McCARUS. 1979 (Preliminary 
Edition). 


PAN-ARABIC 

A SAMPLE LEXICON OF PAN-ARABIC 

By ERNEST T. ABDEL-MASSIH. 1975. 


GENERAL NEAR EAST 

REFORMED ADMINISTRATION IN LEBANON 

By GEORGE GRASSMUCK and KAMAL SALIBI. 1964. 

AFGHANISTAN: SOME NEW APPROACHES 

Edited by GEORGE GRASSMUCK and LUDWIG W. ADAMEC 
with FRANCES IRWIN. 1969. 

PRELIMINARY INDEX OP SHAH-NAMEH ILLUSTRATIONS 

Compiled by JILL NORGREN and EDWARD DAVIS, with an 
Introduction by OLEG GRABAR. 1969. 





