            Stress adaptation in loanword phonology: perception and learnability *

                                                Ellen Broselow

            Stony Brook University (State University of New York at Stony Brook)




1.      The problem: Learnability of interlanguage rankings

Under the widespread assumption that learning a phonological grammar means learning the
language-specific rankings of phonological constraints, the framework of Optimality Theory
forces us to ask not only what constraint rankings describe the data of a language, but also how
those rankings could have been learned. The focus of this paper is cases in which the second
question is not so easily answered. Language contact situations confront speakers with types of
structures that are not found in their native language, and in these situations we often find
systematic adaptation patterns that are fairly consistent across speakers of the same native
language. Analyses of loanword adaptations patterns have often posited fairly intricate webs of
constraint rankings in the production grammar which cannot be motivated by the data of either
the native or the foreign language. One possible explanation of such apparently unmotivated
rankings is that they reflect the universal default. If this is the case, we should expect the same
rankings to emerge in all situations where evidence to the contrary is lacking. But as Peperkamp
(in press) has argued, there appears to be cross-linguistic variation in adaptation patterns that
cannot be attributed to the data of either of the languages in contact. This leaves us with a
puzzle: if we find interlanguage production grammar rankings that are a product neither of
universal grammar nor of input data, what is their source? In this paper I argue that several
adaptation patterns that appear to involve unlearnable rankings of production grammar
constraints are actually an effect of the perception grammar.
        I will consider two cases of loanword adaptation which have been analyzed in terms of
crucial rankings of production grammar constraints, among them a constraint mandating
preservation of foreign word stress. In each case, while the proposed rankings account for the
adaptation patterns, it is unclear how these rankings could have been learned from the ambient


        *
          This paper has benefitted greatly from feedback from participants in my Fall 2003 seminar in language
contact phonology, from colleagues at Stony Brook University, and from the NELS audience, and particularly from
the careful comments of the editors and reviewers of this volume. Special thanks are due to Christina Bethin, Dan
Finer, Yoonjung Kang, Miran Kim, and Zheng Xu.
                                          Ellen Broselow

data. I argue that in neither case are unlearnable rankings necessary; rather, the adaptation
patterns can be seen as effects of interference from the native language grammar–specifically,
that portion of the grammar that maps the acoustic signal onto phonological representations. I
assume (following Boersma 1998) that the perception grammar defines which aspects of the
acoustic signal are linguistically significant, causing listeners to misinterpret certain aspects of
the contact structures. In this bipartite model, the inventory of structures presented by the
contacting language is often richer than that presented by the native language input (the richness
of the stimulus). But the listener’s perception grammar maps this input onto a more restricted set
of phonological representations, providing the adapter with an impoverished base, or set of
underlying representations (Boersma 2000, Lassettre and Donegan 1998).
         The paper begins with a survey of several types of ranking puzzles in language contact,
followed by consideration of the sorts of rankings that we would expect to find in language
contact phonology. I then consider examples of the adaptation of stress in borrowed words. The
source stress is maintained in both Huave words borrowed from Spanish (Davidson and Noyer
1996) and in Fijian words borrowed from English (Kenstowicz 2003). However, the two
languages differ in terms of the strategies used to resolve conflicts between the original stress
position and the stress position dictated by the native language grammar: such conflicts are
resolved in Huave by deletion of segments and in Fijian by lengthening of vowels. These
different adaptation patterns have been described in the literature in terms of different rankings of
a production grammar constraint MatchStress (or MaxStress) directing that the position of the
source stress should be maintained. But because this constraint is specific to loanwords, it is not
clear how the early adapters could have learned its ranking. The contention of this paper is that
the maintenance of source stress is not a function of the production grammar at all, but rather is
determined by the native language perception/decoding principles which determine how foreign
language stress is interpreted. In Huave, stress is demarcative, uniformly falling on the final
syllable of the word, which causes Huave listeners to assume that stressed syllables are word-
final in Spanish; thus, segmental material following the stressed syllable is lost when in the
mapping from acoustic signal to lexical representation. Similar loss of posttonic material is
found in the adaptation of Spanish words by speakers of K’ichee’, which also has uniformly
word-final stress; in contrast, in Selayarese, where the position of stress is affected by
morphological structure, listeners maintain foreign material following the stress foot. In Fijian,
stress serves to enhance lexical contrasts of vowel length. I argue that Fijian listeners hearing a
stressed syllable in a position that is normally not stressed interpret this as an indication of
underlying vowel length.

2.     Ranking puzzles in language contact phonology

In the OT model of phonological acquisition, it has been proposed that the initial state involves a
set of constraints in which markedness constraints are ranked above faithfulness constraints,
ensuring that learners begin with the most restrictive grammar (Gnanadesikan [1994] 2004), or
that while constraints may initially be unranked, the ranking process favors M>>F rankings
(Hayes [1999] 2004, Prince and Tesar [1999] 2004). Aside from the bias toward markedness
over faithfulness constraints, the learner establishes a ranking based on input from the ambient
language. Where the input data is not sufficient to establish an exhaustive ranking of all
constraints, the final state of the grammar could conceivably impose only a partial ranking (Ross
1996, Boersma 1998), or learners could choose an arbitrary ranking of otherwise unrankable
constraints (Tesar and Smolensky 2000, page 49); in the latter case, we need not assume that all
learners would arrive at the same rankings. Given these assumptions, we can identify the
following possible ranking patterns in the interlanguage grammar (the grammar that accounts for
systematic behavior in loan adaptation and/or second language acquisition):

(1)    Possible ranking patterns in SLA or loan adaptation:
       a. M >>F: putative default pattern
       b. F >> M: motivated by marked forms
       c. M >>M, F>>F: mysterious if not motivated by data

While M>>F rankings, as the default, need not be motivated by data, the other rankings are data-
driven. But examination of language contact phonology reveals many examples of apparent
production grammar rankings that are not obviously motivated by data other than language
contact data:

1. Differential Difficulty (M>>M): In this case, one foreign language structure is mastered more
quickly than another, even though neither appears in the native language. One example of this
pattern from second language acquisition involves final obstruent devoicing, which is attested for
a number of speakers whose native language (such as Mandarin Chinese and Tswana) allows no
obstruent codas of any type, and whose target language allows both voiced and voiceless
obstruent codas (Wissing and Zonneveld 1996, Grijzenhout and van Rooij 2001, Eckman 1981,
Flege and Davidian 1984, Flege, McCutcheon, and Smith 1987, Yavas 1994, Broselow, Chen,
and Wang 1998, Broselow 2004, Broselow and Xu 2004). The M>>M pattern also underlies
much of the evidence for lexical strata, analyzed by Ito and Mester (1995) as involving
subgrammars specific to core and peripheral vocabularies.

2. Differential faithfulness (F>>F): In this case, certain aspects of contacting structures are
preserved while others are lost. Thus, as discussed below, in borrowings from Spanish into
Huave, the stress of the source word is preserved at the price of segmental unfaithfulness
(Davidson & Noyer 1996), while in borrowings from Bahasa Indonesia into Selayarese, the
source segmental structure is preserved while the source stress may be lost (Broselow 1999).
Some F>>F rankings might be explained as the reflection of a universal perceptual similarity
hierarchy (Steriade 2001), but some cases appear to violate proposed universal rankings. For
example, as Kenstowicz (2003) points out, English initial voiced stops in words borrowed into
Fijian are realized as prenasalized stops, violating the putative universal ranking of production
grammar constraints Ident[nas] >> Ident[voi] proposed by Steriade (2001).

3. Differential repair strategies (F>>F or M>>F): In this case, the source language presents
adapters with two or more structures that are equally impossible in the borrowing language, yet
speakers use distinct repair strategies in adapting them. For example, in Wolof borrowings from
French, obstruent-sonorant onsets are repaired by a copy vowel inserted between the two
consonants (kalas from French klas ‘class’), but [s]-stop onsets are repaired by insertion of a
                                         Ellen Broselow

default vowel before the two consonants (estati from French staty ‘statue,’ Fleischhacker 2000).
Since Wolof has no complex onsets of either type, the native language provides no basis for
distinguishing them. Similar patterns are found in numerous languages (Broselow 1993,
Fleischhacker 2000).

4. Ranking reversals (C1>>C2, C2>>C1): Many of the preceding cases involve rankings that
are not motivated by the native language data, but are at least not inconsistent with it. In other
cases, interlanguage patterns require an actual reversal of the rankings of the native language,
even though the contacting language does not appear to present evidence for the new ranking.
Thus in Malayalam, single voiceless consonants do not occur intervocalically. In Malayalee
English, English intervocalic voiceless stops are realized as voiceless geminates (Ident(voice)>>
Ident(mora)) although in Malayalam, length distinctions are preserved in preference to voicing
distinctions (Ident(mora)>>Ident(voice), Mohanan and Mohanan 2003).
         Various possible sources of such ‘hidden’ rankings (Davidson 2000) include the role of
frequency in the data (Broselow 2004); the native speaker’s articulatory program (Ussishkin &
Wedel 2003); and the role of perception (Silverman 1992, Yip 1993, Kenstowicz 2001, 2003,
Kang 2003, Peperkamp 2003). The central claim of this paper is that what at first glance appear
to be ‘hidden’ rankings in the production grammar (that is, rankings that are not in any obvious
way learnable from the data) either emerge from input frequency, or reflect rankings in the native
language perception grammar that have been learned from native language data.
         In the next three sections I consider cases of loan adaptation differing in the extent to
which source language stress is preserved, and in the sorts of unfaithfulness that are tolerated to
facilitate stress preservation. Two of these cases have been analyzed in the literature in terms of
a production grammar constraint (MATCH STRESS or MAX STRESS), which applies only to
borrowed words. The postulation of a stress preservation constraint, along with the assumption
that constraints can be freely ranked across languages, predicts a wide variety of possible loan
adaptation patterns. I will argue that whether or not the source stress is maintained in loanwords
is a function not of the rankings of production grammar constraints, but rather of the role played
by stress in the native language.

3.     Adaptation of demarcative stress
3.1.   Production grammar analysis of Huave adaptations

Huave, a language isolate spoken in southeastern Oaxaca State, Mexico, has borrowed a number
of words from Spanish. Huave restricts stress to one of the two final syllables of the word, while
Spanish words may have stress on any one of the three final syllables, creating conflicts between
the Huave stress restrictions and the actual source stress. Davidson and Noyer (1996) analyze the
adaptation patterns of the San Mateo del Mar dialect of Huave in terms of ranked constraints of
the production grammar, some of which cannot obviously be motivated by either the Huave or
the Spanish data.
        In Huave native vocabulary, stress falls on a final syllable when that syllable is closed,
and on the penultimate syllable when the final is light. Huave has no vowel length contrast, so
syllable weight is dependent on the presence or absence of a coda consonant. Because all stems
of major lexical categories and all suffixes end in a consonant, final stress is the overwhelmingly
predominant pattern in Huave.1

(2)       Huave native vocabulary (Kreger and Stairs 1981):
          a. aráõ              ‘he does’
          b. taraõás           ‘I did’
          c. taraõasán         ‘we did’
          d. íke              ‘I’

Words have a single stress, with the exception of words containing a suffix or suffixes
comprising more than two syllables, where a secondary stress falls on the root-final syllable and
primary stress on the word-final syllable (Kreger and Stairs 1981, page xvii).
       To describe the Huave facts, Davidson and Noyer posit the following constraints, each
apparently undominated in the native grammar:

(3)       Huave Constraints
          a. TROCHAICFEET : Feet are bimoraic trochees (CV’CV or CVC’)
          b. ALIGN -R: The right edge of a Prosodic Word is aligned with the right edge of a foot
          c. FREE -V: A word should not end in a vowel.

Interestingly, these three constraints show different degrees of strength in borrowed words. The
most nativized vocabulary items maintain the Huave pattern of final stressed and closed
syllables, while still preserving the Spanish stress--if necessary, by deletion of segmental material
in the final syllable of the source:

(4)       Loans into Huave from Spanish, Stratum 1 (most nativized)
          Spanish       Huave
          garabáto      garabát       ‘hook’
          kardúmen      kardóm        ‘flock’
          márso         márs          ‘March’
          ígado         ík            ‘liver’

Davidson and Noyer attribute the maintenance of Spanish stress to a constraint MATCH STRESS
which is, along with Huave stress constraints and FREE -V, ranked above segmental faithfulness
constraints in the core stratum:

(5)       MATCH (STRESS): Stress falls on the same vowel in the source word as in the loanword
          (Davidson and Noyer 1996, page 69).

(6) Davidson and Noyer’s production grammar, Stratum 1




          1
              Kreger and Stairs (1981) mention a single morpheme which falls outside the stress domain, the enclitic an
‘only’.
                                          Ellen Broselow

      |garabáto|                MATCH              TROCHAIC             FREE -V       MAX
        ‘hook’                  STRESS             FEET , ALIGN -R
      a. gara(báto)                                                     *!
 Lb. gara(bát)                                                                        *
       |igado|
       ‘liver’
      a. (íka)do                                   *!
      b. (íka)                                                          *!
 Lc. (ík)                                                                             ***

While the native vocabulary appears not to provide evidence for any ranking of FREE -V with
respect to the stress constraints, the second stratum of more peripheral loanwords respects the
stress constraints but not FREE -V:

(7)       Huave from Spanish, Stratum 2:
          Spanish      Huave
          gwanábana    gwanába       ‘sweet-sop’
          mandádo      mandáda       ‘command’

The facts of this less nativized stratum can be described by assuming a second subgrammar in
which the constraint enforcing segmental faithfulness (MAX ), while still dominated by the Huave
stress constraints, is ranked above FREE -V:

(8) Davidson and Noyer’s production grammar, Stratum 2
 |gwanábana|                    MATCH              TROCHAIC            MAX            FREE -V
 ‘sweet-sop’                    STRESS             FEET , ALIGN -R
      a. gwa(nába)na                               *!
      b. gwana(bána)            *!
      c. gwa(nában)                                *!                    *
 Ld. gwa(nába)                                                               **       *
      e. gwa(náb)                                                            **!*

And finally, the third stratum of least nativized loanwords exhibits violations of both native
stress constraints and FREE -V, while still preserving the Spanish stress:
(9)      Huave from Spanish, Stratum 3 (least nativized):
         Spanish              Huave
         mjérkoles            mjérkoles      ‘Wednesday’
         médiko               médiko         ‘doctor’

(10) Davidson and Noyer’s production grammar, Stratum 3
       |médiko|                   MATCH             MAX           TROCHAIC              FREE -V
       ‘doctor’                   STRESS                          FEET , ALIGN -R
 L a. (médi)ko                                                     *                    *
      b. (médik)                                    *!             *
      c. (mé)dik                                    *!             *
      d. (médi)                                     *!*                                 *

The three strata therefore differ in their tolerance of MAX constraint violations (apocope): in
stratum 1, apocope is tolerated to satisfy both the demand for right-aligned trochaic feet and final
consonants (garabát from garabáto, ík from ígado); in stratum 2 apocope is tolerated to satisfy
stress constraints but not the demand for final consonants (gwanába from gwanábana); in
stratum 3, a loanword that has antepenultimate stress is fully segmentally faithful to the original
(médiko). The three strata arise, Davidson and Noyer argue, from the differential ranking of the
anti-deletion MAX constraints with respect to MATCH STRESS >> TROCHAICFEET , ALIGN -R >>
FREE -V. Although both apocope (garabát from garabáto) and non-trochaic stress (médiko) are
possible in loans, there are no cases in which both cooccur in a single form, because to derive a
form such as *médik from médiko would require the ranking FREE -
V>>MAX >>TROCHAICFEET ,ALIGN -R, a reversal of the markedness constraint rankings. The
Huave data are therefore consistent with Ito and Mester’s (1995) claim that while faithfulness
constraints can be ranked differently in the subgrammars associated with different lexical strata,
the relative rankings of markedness constraints are constant across strata. However, the ranking
MATCH STRESS >> TROCHAICFEET , ALIGN -R >> FREE -V is motivated by the loanword data rather
than by any facts of the native language.
        Additional complications ensue when we consider the treatment of Spanish complex
onsets (forbidden in native Huave vocabulary), which are simplified by means of vowel
insertion:

(11)     pláto         polát           ‘silver’
         brasáda       barasáda        ‘unit of measure’ (*basáda, *sáda)

It is striking that while entire syllables may be deleted to preserve Spanish stress (gwanába from
gwanábana ‘sweet sop’), the strategy used to avoid complex onsets is insertion, rather than
deletion. Davidson and Noyer elegantly describe these facts by ranking MATCH STRESS and
MAX (C,V) over *COMPLEX ONSET , in turn ranked over DEP (V). This ranking makes vowel
insertion the preferred repair strategy where there is a choice (as in the resolution of a complex
onset violation). But the mandate that stress may neither leave its original syllable nor fall to the
                                                 Ellen Broselow

left of the penultimate syllable rules out vowel insertion as an option in posttonic position.
Again, however, we must wonder how the original Huave adapters might have come up with
such a ranking, in the absence of any evidence for either consonant deletion or vowel insertion in
Huave. Thus, this analysis raises a number of thorny questions concerning the learnability of the
constraint rankings:

        1. How would Huave speakers arrive at the ranking MATCH STRESS>>MAX (C) >>
*COMPLEX ONSET>>DEP (V) (F>>F>>M>>F)? This ranking is necessary to describe the
pattern whereby segment deletion is used to maintain the Spanish stress, but vowel insertion is
used to resolve complex onset violations. However, it is not clear how such a ranking might
have been learned. Because Huave is a language in which all surface forms exhibit a regular
stress pattern, the hypothesis of Richness of the Base requires us to assume that the stress
constraints outrank any faithfulness constraints that would preserve lexically marked stress such
as IDENT (STRESS)I-O (the typical M>>F ranking). Why, then, is MATCH STRESS ranked so high?
MATCH STRESS could be argued to be an output-output constraint, a type which Hayes (1999) has
argued is ranked high by default. But this simply moves the question to another level: if we
assume that all O-O constraints are ranked high in the absence of evidence to the contrary, why
should an O-O constraint demanding faithfulness to stress outrank O-O constraints demanding
faithfulness to segments? The pattern of faithfulness to stress over faithfulness to segments is not
universal, as we shall see in the discussion of Selayarese below, and therefore must be explained
as an effect of either the Huave grammar or the Spanish input.

        2. Why would Huave speakers rank stress constraints over FREE -V (M>>M)? This
ranking describes the fact that adapters give up the requirement that words end in consonants
before they give up the requirements that the stress foot be aligned with the right edge of the
word. But what would motivate such a ranking, when both the stress constraints and FREE -V are
uniformly obeyed in Huave (for content words), and frequently violated in Spanish?2

3.2.    Perception-oriented analysis of Huave adaptations

In this section I argue that what appear to be the effects of apparently unlearnable constraint
rankings in Huave loan adaptation are actually a reflection of the native language perception
grammar. Specifically, I argue that the unambiguously demarcative function of stress in Huave
leads listeners with little or no knowledge of Spanish to assume that stressed syllables are word-
final. The resulting forms, in which posttonic material is not analyzed as part of the word, are
lexicalized, leading to what appears to be posttonic deletion in the earlier strata. The increasing
faithfulness to Spanish segments seen in later strata is a function of increasing contact with
Spanish, which forces listeners to revise the perception grammar, allowing a wider range of word


        2
           I assume that Huave speakers distinguish content and function words, and that the presence of vowel-final
function words in Huave would not contribute to demotion of F REE -V. See Peperkamp 2004 for arguments that even
infants distinguish content and function words, and that basic generalizations about stress are not disrupted by
function words that interfere with general patterns.
shapes. This in turn forces a revision of the production grammar.
         Before discussing the specifics of word adaptation, some information on the
sociolinguistic context of the Huave adaptation patterns will be useful. As recently as 1961, 81%
of Huave speakers in San Mateo del Mar were monolingual in Huave (Diebold 1961, page 104),
and the community was “almost wholly preliterate” (Diebold 1961, page 105). For those
speakers with knowledge of Spanish, “Spanish was acquired relatively late in life, rarely in
childhood”, and only 6% could be considered fully bilingual...subordinate bilingualism in San
Mateo involves very imperfect reproduction of Spanish, with a heavy load of interference from
Huave” (Diebold 1961, page 105). This situation has changed over the succeeding decades, so
that at present, although “Huave is the language of everyday life...At least 90% of adults and
100% of children are now also completely fluent in Spanish; monolingual Huave speakers have
become a negligible percentage of the population (this was not true 20 years ago)” (Kim and
Park-Doob 2005). I will argue that the different strata of the Huave loanwords reflect the
dramatic changes over time in adapters’ familiarity with Spanish.

3.2.1. Faithfulness to stress vs. faithfulness to segments: Stratum 1

        We begin by considering the most nativized words, which invariably end in stressed
closed syllables (e.g., ígado is adapted as ík ‘liver’). In the following discussion, I assume that
the two mappings from the phonetic form-- to a phonological surface representation, which
encodes prosodic structure, and to a lexical representation, which serves as input to the
production grammar-- take place in parallel (see (22) in the introduction to this volume). I
propose that the preservation of source stress over the preservation of source segments, which is
encoded by Davidson and Noyer as a ranking of MATCH STRESS over MAX , is in fact an effect of
a high-ranked perception grammar constraint:

(12)   Perception Grammar Constraint:
       ASSUME LEX WORD EDGE -V’C#: in mapping the acoustic signal to
       phonological representations, assume a word edge following each
       consonant preceded by a stressed vowel.

This constraint is one of a family of constraints aiding in the segmentation of the speech string
into words (see for example the perception grammar constraints proposed by Boersma (2000)
which posit word boundaries at the beginning and end of an utterance). For Huave,
ASSUME WORD EDGE -V’C# is undominated, serving as a filter on possible phonological
representations. The high ranking of ASSUME WORD EDGE -V’C# would cause listeners to
assume that material following the stress foot is either part of the following word, or noise
without linguistic significance. (An example of such nonsignificant articulations in English
would be release of a phrase-final consonant, or a labial closure following a phrase-final vowel,
coincident with simply shutting the mouth. The final consonant in English ‘nope’ most likely
represents misanalysis of this closure as a segment.) In contrast to a constraint mandating that
the right edge of a foot coincide with the right edge of a word, this constraint permits learners to
segment strings into words on the basis of overt information present in the phonetic form.
        I assume that at the initial stages of Huave-Spanish contact, ASSUME WORD EDGE -V’C#
remained undominated in the Huave perception grammar, so that a Huave speaker first exposed
                                                 Ellen Broselow

to Spanish forms such as [ígado] ‘liver’ and [garabáto] ‘hook’ would posit a word boundary
after each consonant following a stressed vowel (/íg/#ado, /garabát/#o). The forms identified as
lexical items (|ig|, |garabat|) would then serve as input to the production grammar. Thus, the
adapted forms ík and garabát would emerge not as a result of segment deletion in the production
grammar, but as a result of a misanalysis of the lexical representation. It now becomes clear why
final vowels are never deleted from Spanish forms with antepenultimate stress; for example,
médiko ‘doctor’ never becomes *médik. In Davidson and Noyer’s account this is the reflection
of the production grammar ranking TROCH FEET >>MAX >>FREE -V. In the perception-oriented
account, apocope is a function of misparsing, not of truncation in the production grammar. The
Huave perception grammar provides no reason to parse médiko as médik#o, because médik would
not be a legal Huave word shape. If any misparsing occurred, the resulting form would be *méd
(on analogy with ík ‘liver’ from ígado). We begin by considering the most nativized words,
which invariably end in stressed closed syllables (e.g., ígado is adapted as ík ‘liver’).
        We must now consider whether the strategy of assuming that a stressed syllable marks the
end of a lexical unit is a realistic one. A good deal of evidence suggests that even very young
children make use of stress information in segmenting words, and that their segmentation
patterns reflect the normal position of stress in a language (see for example Jusczyk 1999,
Thiessen and Saffran 2003, Werker and Curtin 2005). The same principles have been shown to
guide adults’ segmentations, using a variety of experimental paradigms. For example, Cutler and
Butterfield (1992) found that in both natural ‘slips of the ear’ and in experimental investigation
of English listeners’ segmentation of highly attenuated speech, “listeners tend to insert
boundaries before strong syllables and delete them before weak syllables...the rhythmic
properties of the input guide listeners’ hypotheses about the placement of lexical boundaries in
imperfectly perceived speech” (Cutler and Butterfield 1992, page 232). 3 Since initial contact
with a foreign language, particularly in the absence of orthographic information, is a situation
likely to lead to ‘imperfectly perceived speech’, it seems reasonable that Huave listeners should
have segmented Spanish strings according to Huave patterns.
        However, in some cases this erroneous segmentation might entail positing that the
remnant is also a word, which would appear to violate the Possible Word Constraint of Norris,
McQueen, Cutler, and Butterfield (1995), who found that listeners had difficulty recognizing
(for example) ‘egg’ in strings like fegg, where the remnant [f] is not a possible word. This
principle militates against Huave listeners segmenting garabáto as garabát#o, since [o] would
not fulfill the Huave requirement that all words contain a bimoraic foot. Later work, however,
indicates that the Possible Word Constraint as originally stated is too strong; Cutler, Demuth, and
McQueen (2002) found that when the remnant was a syllable, rather than a single segment, word
detection was not hampered; Sesotho listeners efficiently detected rora in jirora, even though the
minimal word size in Sesotho is bisyllabic, and therefore ji, the remnant from segmentation ji#
rora, is not a possible Sesotho word. It is therefore plausible that the Huave speakers could have
identified a string like garabát as a word, even where the string garabáto could not be segmented


        3
          The rankings of the segmentation constraints in the perception grammar of English and Huave listeners
will of course differ, with A SSU M E W O RD E D GE -V’C ranked low in the English perception grammar, but in both
languages, constraints relating stress and word edges will play a role.
into two possible words (though in non-final position, the final [o] could plausibly be assigned to
the following word).
        A second possible objection to the account of the Huave data comes from work by
Peperkamp and Dupoux (2002), who argue that adult speakers of languages in which stress is
invariably utterance-final exhibit ‘deafness’ to stress in other languages, manifested in their
difficulty in distinguishing CVCV words differing only in the position of stress (as contrasted
with their ability to perceive segmental contrasts in such words). These results appear to be
inconsistent with our claim that Huave speakers use stress to determine word structure. But in
Peperkamp and Dupoux’s experimental paradigm, listeners were presented with already
segmented ‘words’. Their subjects’ task was therefore very different from that of speakers in a
language contact situation attempting to segment foreign language strings into words.4
        I assume, therefore, that the least nativized loanwords represent words which entered the
lexicon at a stage in which the Spanish forms were filtered through the native Huave perception
grammar. At this stage, Huave ASSUME WORD EDGE -V’C# was ranked more highly than, for
example, the constraint that accounts for the results of Cutler and Butterfield (1992) showing the
tendency of English speakers to posit a word boundary before a stressed syllable. At this stage
Spanish forms are interpreted as consistent with Huave restrictions, and so provide no pressure to
restructure the production grammar:

(13)     Stratum 1 (ígado 6 ík)
         a. perception grammar (=Huave native grammar)
                 ASSUMEWORD EDGE -V’C# >>
                        ASSUMEWORD EDGE-#STRESSED SYLL (English)

A form such as ígado would emerge from the perception grammar in truncated form. (Below I
concentrate only on the relationship between stress and truncation, ignoring various segmental
issues such as the Spanish [d/ð] alternation. I also take no stand on whether the change from [g]
to [k] in the loanword is a function of misperception or misproduction.)

(14) input to perception grammar: ‘liver’
 [ígado]                                 AssumeWordEdge-V’C#                    Other Word Edge Constraints
   a. |igado|#                             *!                                    *



 Lb. |ig|# (or |ik|#)                                                            *

The output of the perception grammar would then be submitted to the production grammar.
Derivation of the Huave surface form is trivial, since the lexicalized form satisfies all Huave

         4
          Altmann (2006) presents experimental results that are problematic for Peperkamp and Dupoux’s claim that
invariant utterance-edge stress leads to the greatest degree of stress deafness. Briefly, Altmann found that Arabic
speakers, whose language assigns stress to one of the final three syllables of a word, depending on syllable weight,
showed greater difficulty in cross-linguistic perception of stress than speakers of French or Turkish, where stress is
always assigned at the utterance edge.
                                                Ellen Broselow

constraints:

(15) input to production grammar
 |ig|                         ALIGN -R,                        FREE-V                   MAX
                              TROCHAICFEET
 La. ík
    b. í                                                                 *!             *

Because at this early stage all lexical representations were assumed to conform to Huave
restrictions, there was no motivation to alter the ranking of constraints in the production
grammar.




3.2.2. Posttonic deletion vs. pretonic insertion

        The asymmetry in pretonic and posttonic repair tactics, illustrated by vowel insertion in
forms like polát (Spanish pláto ‘silver’) and barasáda (Spanish brasáda ‘unit of measure’) but
deletion in forms like ik ‘liver’ (Spanish ígado) is now unsurprising. Material was lost in
positions where the perception grammar defined it as not part of the relevant word, or as not
linguistically significant (e.g., as an effect of consonantal release), but preserved where the
grammar defined it as potentially contrastive. On this account, preservation of perceived
segments is the norm, and deletion is not a grammatical process; rather, the apparent deletion of
posttonic material results from incorrect identification of right word edges.
        It would not be surprising if missegmentation also occasionally led to confusion
concerning the beginnings of words as well. In Huave, a word can only be preceded by a phrase
boundary, by V’C, or by V’CV (the latter following a function word). Spanish, however, allows
a wider range of options, and the Huave speaker might be expected to occasionally misparse the
left edges of words in running Spanish speech. Indeed, borrowings from Spanish evidence both
the addition of material at the left edge, in arín± from Spanish rán±o ‘ranch’, and the loss of
pretonic material, in forms like nimál ‘animal’ from Spanish animál and maríl ‘yellow’ from
Spanish amarío (Diebold 1961, page 107).5 This pretonic truncation, if analyzed as part of the
production grammar, would require the ranking ONSET >> MAX (V). But such a ranking would
contradict the ranking required for the native vocabulary, which must permit vowel-initial words
(which are relatively common). The adaptation pattern would therefore represent a reversal of
the normal situation found in a stratified lexicon, in which the core vocabulary obeys a ranking of
M>>F while the more peripheral vocabulary obeys the ranking F>>M, and the loss of the initial


           5
         For the sake of clarity, I have adopted Davidson and Noyer’s (1997) transcription system in rendering
Diebold’s forms. Diebold transcribes these forms as àríì±, nìmál and màríìl, respectively.
vowel could not be a function of nativization, but rather would represent an emergence of the
unmarked effect. Such an effect does not, however, hold generally for Huave loanwords–see, for
example, asét ‘oil’.6 Given the sporadic nature of initial deletion, the best analysis appears to be
as an effect of misparsing rather than as an effect of the production grammar.

3.2.3. Requirement for right-aligned stress foot vs. requirement for final consonant

In the account sketched above, the most nativized (stratum 1) loanwords represent an early stage
in which Huave speakers segmented Spanish strings in terms of Huave word structure, and their
erroneously segmented forms were then lexicalized. However, increasing contact with speakers
of Spanish would inevitably have confronted Huave speakers with lexical, syntactic, and
metalinguistic evidence for words of shapes that were incompatible with Huave restrictions,
resulting in the restructuring of both the perception and (consequently) the production grammars.
As we saw above, the first restriction to go is the requirement that all words end in a consonant
(resulting in forms like gwanába ‘sweet-sop’ from gwanábana), while the last restriction to be
abandoned is the requirement that all words end in a bimoraic trochaic foot (médiko ‘doctor’).
The relative strength of these requirements is described in Davidson and Noyer’s 1997 account in
terms of the ranking of the stress constraints over FREE -V. I will argue that their relative
strengths are actually a function of the input to the adapters–that is, the extent to which each is
violated in the Spanish data.
        While Spanish words may violate both the Huave stress constraints and FREE -V, they do
so with differing degrees of frequency. Eddington (2000) finds, among the 4,829 most frequent
Spanish words, 59% are vowel-final (2,850/4,829) while 41% (1,979/4,829) are consonant-final.
Therefore, the majority of Spanish words end in vowels, violating FREE -V. In contrast, a
majority of Spanish words obey the requirement that words end in a right-aligned bimoraic
trochaic foot. This requirement is satisfied by slightly more than 68% of the words in
Eddington’s corpus: words ending in V’CV total 51.6% (2,494/4,829) and words ending in V’C
total16.5% (798/4,829). In contrast, fewer than a third of the words in Eddington’s corpus
violate the stress constraints; these are of three types, words with antepenultimate stress (5.6%, or
274/4,829); consonant-final words with penultimate stress (1085, or 22.4%), and vowel-final
words with final stress (178, or 3.6%). Therefore, the input to Huave speakers will contain more
forms consistent with the Huave stress constraints than forms consistent with the requirement
that words be consonant-final:


(16)   Percentage of Spanish words consistent with Huave constraints
       a. stress constraints: 68%
       b. FREE -V: 41%

As Huave speakers begin to recognize words ending in vowels, they will begin to create a
perception grammar distinct from that motivated solely by the native language data. Such a
grammar will admit the possibility of words ending in V’CV. They will hear a relatively smaller
number of words that do not end in a bimoraic foot, and misanalysis of such forms should persist

       6
           In Diebold’s transcription, àsét (Diebold 1961, page 107).
                                         Ellen Broselow

longer. In particular, words like médiko, which constitute only 5.6% of the input, will take
longer to become established as possible lexical representations. It seems likely that such words
are characteristic of the pronunciation of bilinguals who have developed two clearly distinct
grammars, one of which (the Huave grammar) imposes predictable stress on all words, and the
second of which (the Spanish grammar) maintains lexically marked stress.

3.3. Other languages with demarcative stress: K’ichee’ and Selayarese

        Davidson and Noyer’s (1997) account of stress preservation as a function of the ranking
of MATCH STRESS leads us to expect that various rankings of this constraint could be found in
different language contact situations. In contrast, the alternative analysis developed above
ascribes stress preservation to specific properties of the borrowing language: the perception
grammar of Huave speakers leads them to missegment foreign language utterances. In order for
such missegmentation to arise, certain conditions are required, both phonological and
sociolinguistic. First, the borrowing language must have clearly demarcative stress, oriented
toward the word edge, while the source language must allow stress in positions farther from word
edge than are possible in the borrowing language. Second, borrowing must occur under
conditions that do not present borrowers with unambiguously segmented speech: generally,
through an aural route rather than through orthography, through connected speech rather than
citation forms, and in a situation in which listeners have limited knowledge of the source
language and little explicit instruction or correction from speakers of the source language. We
would expect that given the same conditions, other languages should exhibit similar deletion of
segmental material peripheral to the stress. We now consider two additional cases of loan
adaptation into languages with demarcative stress, one in which source stress is routinely
preserved, and one in which it is not.

3.3.1. K’ichee’
        K’ichee’, a member of the Quichean branch of eastern Mayan, is similar to Huave in
allowing only words ending in stressed closed syllables. Like Huave, K’ichee’ has also borrowed
heavily from Spanish. Isaacs and Wolter (2003) present the following data from the Nahualá
dialect spoken in western Guatemala:

(17)   Spanish        K’ichee’
       atáke          atá:k          ‘attack’
       baráto         barát          ‘barracks’
       kadéna         kadé:n         ‘chain’
       gánas          gá:n           ‘desire’
       mansána        mansá’n        ‘apple’
       antónia        tó’n           ‘Antonia’
       durásno        turá’s         ‘peach’

As in Huave, the position of Spanish stress is maintained in words borrowed into K’ichee’, and
the stressed syllable is rendered final by deletion of posttonic segmental material.7 The
sensitivity of K’ichee’ speakers to the stress pattern of their language is apparently established
early; according to Demuth (1996), the first words of children acquiring K’ichee’ as their first
language are monosyllabic, with truncation of pretonic syllables (e.g., [lóm] for [jolóm] ‘head’).
This pattern contrasts with the early productions of learners of Dutch, English, and Sesotho, who
tend to produce disyllabic trochees, the preferred word structure of their ambient languages.
Note that the difference between the simplification patterns of children acquiring K’ichee’ and
adult K’ichee’ speakers adapting Spanish loans rules out the possibility that the adult adaptation
pattern represents an initial state default ranking.
        The similarities in loan adaptation by speakers of Huave and K’ichee’ are striking. These
similarities are, furthermore, expected, given the account sketched above in which uniformly
demarcative stress leads to missegmentation of words that do not conform to the native language
pattern in which stress position and word boundary position correspond. However, an alternative
account of the correspondence between the Huave and K’ichee’ adaptations is possible: that
MATCH STRESS is universally highly ranked, by default. We now turn to a third language which
shows that this cannot be the case.

3.3.2. Selayarese

        In many ways, the stress system of Selayarese is quite similar to that of Huave; both
prefer a trochaic foot at the right edge of the word, ranking TROCHAICFOOT and ALIGN -
R(WORD ,FOOT ) high. However, Selayarese differs from Huave in that Selayarese codas do not
contribute to syllable weight, so all feet are bisyllabic, yielding penultimate stress:

(18)     Selayarese native stress (Basri1999, Broselow 1999)
         sampúlo        'ten'
         bálaõ          'creek'
         kalihára       'ant'

        Selayarese has borrowed a large number of words from Bahasa Indonesia (BI). While
many BI words also have penultimate stress, the BI prohibition on stressed schwa leads in some
cases to final stress. As the forms below illustrate, Selayarese borrowers ignore the source stress
of BI words, assigning them stress according to Selayarese restrictions. (Because Selayarese
lacks schwa, BI schwa is realized as a full vowel in Selayarese, though the quality of this vowel
is not entirely predictable. For discussion of the segmental changes motivated by Selayarese
segmental and syllable structure restrictions, see Basri 1997, Broselow 1999).

(19)    Bahasa Indonesia          Selayarese
        gcmúk                      gómmo§             ‘fat’
        scdckáh                    sidákka            ‘alms’
        scbáb                      sába§              ‘cause’
        bcnáõ                      bánnaõ             ‘thread’


        7
          The Spanish stressed vowel is realized as either a long vowel or a glottalized vowel (represented as v’ by
Isaacs and W olter).
                                               Ellen Broselow

The Huave strategy of deleting posttonic material would obviously not be viable for Selayarese
speakers, since their goal is penultimate stress. However, Selayarese speakers could in principle
use vowel insertion to bring loan words with final stress into conformity with the native stress
restrictions-- as they in fact do with borrowed subminimal forms, such as bom ‘bomb,’ which is
realized as bó§oõ. It is not obvious why BI bcnáõ, for example, should not also be realized with
vowel insertion (*baná§aõ), which would both preserve the source stress and place it in the
normal Selayarese penultimate position. But insertion of segments is used only in monosyllabic
words; in longer words, Selayarese speakers simply shift the original stress to the normal
Selayarese position (bánnaõ).8 We can describe this pattern by the ranking TROCHAICFOOT ,
ALIGN -R >> DEP >> MATCH STRESS (since if MATCH STRESS is part of the grammar of Huave, it
must be part of the grammar of all languages). The ranking TROCHAICFOOT >>DEP is consistent
with the facts of Selayarese, which indeed has no words smaller than two syllables. But the low
ranking of MATCH STRESS would need to be explained.
         We see the same disregard for source stress in another class of words. Many Selayarese
roots end in [r], [l], or [s], none of which is a possible coda (Mithun and Basri 1986, Broselow
1999). When one of these consonants occurs in root-final position, it is followed by a copy of
the preceding vowel. Words with a final epenthetic vowel take stress on the antepenultimate
syllable:

(20)    lámbere           ‘long’
        sússulu           ‘burn’
        maõkásara         ‘Makassar’
        sáhala            ‘profit’

Note that the epenthetic vowel fails to appear before a vowel-initial (nonclitic) suffix (cf.
lámbere/lambéraõ ‘longer’), in contrast to underlying vowels, which always appear (tirére/tireré-
aõ ‘thirsty/thirstier’).
        This association of antepenultimate stress with a final epenthetic vowel in native
vocabulary has been analyzed by ranking HEAD -DEP, which directs that an epenthetic vowel
may not be part of the main stress foot (Alderete 1999), above ALIGN -R. This ranking favors the
formation of a bisyllabic foot containing only underlying vowels over the formation of a perfectly
right-aligned foot:

(21) HEAD -DEP : Stress foot includes only underlying vowels (Alderete 1999)
 |lamber|                              HEAD -DEP                             ALIGN -R
   a. lam (bére)                       *!
 Lb. (lámbe) re                                                              *



        8
          The one exception is korá§aõ ‘Koran’ (Hasan Basri, personal communication). Clearly, there are
sociolinguistic factors that could mandate greater faithfulness in this case.
This pattern is also respected in loanwords, which take antepenultimate stress with a final
epenthetic vowel, regardless of the stress of the source:

(22)   Bahasa Indonesia       Selayarese
       sénter                 séntere         ‘flashlight’
       kclás                  kálasa          ‘class’
       bcrás                  bérasa          ‘rice’
       bclcbás                balábasa        ‘ruler’

The Selayarese speakers could easily have preserved the source stress by adapting BI kclás (for
example) as *kalása rather than kálasa. There would be nothing objectionable in the surface
form *kalása; as the minimal pair sáhala ‘profit’ (from root |sahal|) and sahála ‘sea cucumber’
(from |sahala|) shows, the presence of [r,l,s] surrounded by identical vowels is a necessary but not
a sufficient condition for antepenultimate stress.
         Again, we could describe this pattern by a production grammar ranking HEAD -DEP ,
TROCHAICFOOT >> ALIGN -R, DEP >> MATCH STRESS. But we would need to explain how
Selayarese speakers would have converged on this ranking-- particularly since, as we know from
the Huave case, low ranking of MATCH STRESS is not universal. Let us therefore consider the
ways in which the Selayarese situation differs from the Huave situation.
         First of all, Selayarese speakers are very likely to have a good command of Bahasa
Indonesia, the lingua franca of Indonesia, and the language of formal education. Second, while
stress serves unambiguously in Huave to mark word edges, the role of stress in Selayarese is not
nearly so straightforward. Clearly, the epenthetic forms muddy the relationship between stress
and word edges. An additional complicating factor is the presence of clitics, which fall outside
the stress domain, though they still participate in certain aspects of word-level phonology (Basri
et. al, 2000). Clitic attachment may result in stress as far back as the preantepenult:

(23)   géle -ma - kaõ         ‘we are no longer...’

A sequence of three syllables, only the first of which is stressed, could correspond to any of the
following morphological structures in Selayarese (though the interpretation in (24c) is possible
only if the onset of the third syllable is one of [r,l,s] and if the vowels of the two poststress
syllables are identical):

(24) Possible grammatical structures for óóó (where {,} indicate PWd edges)
       a. óó)} # {(ó.. (separate grammatical words)
       b. (óó)}- ó #    (grammatical word plus clitic)
       c. (óó)ó}#     (root plus epenthetic vowel)

Thus, Selayarese listeners, unlike Huave listeners, cannot use stress to reliably demarcate words,
and cannot disregard segmental material following the stress foot (indeed, such material may
encode lexical contrast in Selayarese, as in bótoro ‘gamble’ vs. bótolo ‘bottle’). Rather than
simply using stress to recover native language word structure, Selayarese listeners must attend to
both stress and segmental structure.
        The Selayarese adapters’ cavalier treatment of foreign stress may seem surprising given
                                                  Ellen Broselow

that stress in principle can function to signal lexical contrast in Selayarese; stress is the only cue
distinguishing epenthetic from nonepenthetic roots (as in the minimal pair sáhala (from |sahal|)
'profit' vs. sahála (from |sahala|) 'sea cucumber').9 But in fact, the functional load of this contrast
is extremely low; this minimal pair may be the only one, and the vast majority of words of the
shape ...V r,l,s V# (where the last two vowels are identical) are epenthetic forms, with
antepenultimate stress.



3.4. Interim summary

         We have seen that in two languages with clearly demarcative, word-edge stress (Huave
and K’ichee’), posttonic material tends to be truncated in loan adaptation. We trace this not to a
ranking of production grammar constraints, but rather to the tendency of such words to be
misparsed in the perception grammar. We now turn to another case of loanword adaptation that
has been analyzed similarly to the Huave case, involving a high-ranking production grammar
constraint mandating source stress. In Fijian, stress does serve as a signal of lexical contrast.
However, stress falls predictably on long vowels, and I will argue that vowel length, not source
stress, is what Fijian listeners attend to.

4.       Adaptation of lexically contrastive stress
4.1.     Stress and length: Production grammar analysis

In the adaptation of loanwords in Fijian, analyzed by Schütz (1978, 1983, 1999) and Kenstowicz
(2003), source stress is preserved not by unfaithfulness to segments but by unfaithfulness to
vowel length. Here again I will argue that the preservation of stress is not an effect of
MATCH STRESS, but rather a reflection of speakers’ misinterpretation of the source words, guided
by their perception grammar.
        In Fijian, as in Huave, main stress falls on a final heavy syllable, otherwise on the penult
(Schütz 1978, 1983, 1999, 2004, Kenstowicz 2003, Hayes 1995). (Note, however, that Schütz
(1999, page 146) argues that it is the rightmost foot of a phrase, rather than of each word, that is
most prominent). We can therefore assume that Fijian, like Huave, has high-ranked
TROCHAICFEET and ALIGN -R. Fijian differs from Huave in that where syllable contrasts in Huave
reside in the presence or absence of a syllable coda, Fijian has only open syllables, but does
employ a contrast between long and short vowels. Secondary stress in Fijian falls on all long
vowels giving rise to contrasts such as that between (25b) and (25c). Strings of lighted syllables
are organized into bisyllabic trochaic feet, as in (25d):




         9
         W e should expect listeners whose language uses stress in this way to be sensitive to foreign stress (as
argued by Peperkamp and Dupoux 2002, Peperkamp 2004).
(25)     Fijian Native Vocabulary (Schütz 1999, Kenstowicz 2003, Hayes 1995)10
         a. ma(káwa)          ‘old’
         b. (màða)(wá:)       ‘worthless’
         c. (mà:)(ðáwa)       ‘week’
         d. (kàmba)(tá-ka)    ‘climb with it’ (Hayes 1995, p. 144)

The requirement of a bimoraic trochee at the right edge of a word forces shortening of a vowel in
penultimate position in native vocabulary:

(26)     a. (síâi) ‘exceed’ (from |si:âi|)
         b. (sì:)(âí-ta) ‘exceed, trans.’ (Hayes 1995, p.145, from Dixon 1988)

Note that lengthening the final vowel would be an alternative means of satisfying the right edge
bimoraic foot requirement (*(si:)(âí:)). Although this would produce an acceptable word
structure (cf. (ndrè:)(ndré:) ‘difficult’, Scott 1948, page 739), this option is not chosen; vowels
are never lengthened in native vocabulary.
         We do see lengthening, however, in loans from English. When English stress falls on the
penultimate syllable, the English stressed vowel can serve as the head of a bisyllabic foot, as in
(27a). But when stress falls on the final syllable, the stressed vowel must be lengthened to retain
stress, as in (27b):

(27)     English Stress Preservation
         a.      pa(±áma)      ‘pajama’
                 ta(âáko)      ‘tobacco’
         b.      mba(zá:)      ‘bazaar’
                 õgi(tá:)      ‘guitar’
            (vs. (±éli)        ‘jelly’)

When the English stress falls on the antepenultimate syllable, we see one of two patterns. Either
the stressed vowel is lengthened, forming a foot on its own, as in (28a), or the final vowel is
lengthened, making the antepenult the head of a bisyllabic foot, as in (28b):

(28)     English Antepenultimate Stress:
         a.     (kò:)(lóni)  ‘colony’
                (tà:)(féta)  ‘taffeta’
         b.     (kàli)(kó:)  ‘calico’
                (pòli)(ó:)   ‘polio’

Thus, the English main stress vowel always receives some stress, although the main stress of the


         10
            Much previous work employs Fijian orthography, in which c represents a voiced interdental fricative, j a
palatal affricate (derived, at least historically, from |ti|), and v a voiced bilabial fricative, while b,d,q represent
voiced prenasalized labial, dental, and velar stops, respectively. I have translated the orthography into phonetic
transcription. The reader is referred to Schütz 1978 for discussion of the impact of loanwords on the segmental
inventory of Fijian.
                                                 Ellen Broselow

Fijian adaptation may fall on an originally unstressed vowel (as in kò:lóni ‘colony’). We should
note that (as pointed out by Schütz 1978, page 25) that not all tense English vowels are realized
in Fijian as long (for example, ‘eagle’ is ikéli, not *ì:kéli and ‘deaconess’ is ndìkonési, not
*ndì:konési). Thus, Fijian borrowers do not appear to identify the English tense/lax contrast as
equivalent to their long/short contrast. In this they differ from Japanese borrowers, as illustrated
by Japanese ±i:pu ‘cheap’ vs. ±ikiN ‘chicken’;11 this difference is no doubt related to the intimate
relationship between vowel length and stress which holds in Fijian but not in Japanese.
        Kenstowicz (2003) analyzes the Fijian adaptation patterns by a ranking reminiscent of
that posited for Huave: TROCHAICFEET , ALIGN -R, and MAX STRESS (=Davidson & Noyer’s
MATCH STRESS) dominate faithfulness constraints (in this case, DEP MORA : do not add a mora).
The contrast between the patterns illustrated in (28a) and (28b) is accounted for by a constraint
that minimizes the perceptual difference between source and output:

(29)     PP-2: a short unstressed V may not be realized as a long stressed V.

Kenstowicz assumes that the ‘colony’ pattern represents the default. However, the ‘calico’
pattern can be derived with the same grammar, if we assume that Fijians analyze the final V of
‘calico’ as underlyingly long, so that PP-2 allows it to be stressed:

(30) Kenstowicz’s production grammar, ‘colony’
 |koloni|                                TROCH FEET ,              MAX              DEP            PP-2
                                         ALIGN -R                  STRESS           MORA
 La.(kò:)(lóni)                                                                     *
   b. (kòlo)(ní:)                                                                   *              *! (i 6 í:)
   c. ko (lóni)                                                    *!

(31) Kenstowicz’s production grammar, ‘calico’
 |kaliko:|                               TROCH FEET ,              MAX              DEP            PP-2
                                         ALIGN -R                  STRESS           MORA
   a.(kà:)(líko)                                                                    *!
 Lb.(kàli)(kó:)
   c. ka (líko)                                                      *!

     Kenstowicz’s analysis provides an elegant account of this complex array of data.
However, it leaves unanswered some of the same sorts of questions we have been pondering:


        11
          This contrast is generally realized in English by some combination of spectral and durational cues,
depending on the dialect (Escudero 2001, Escudero and Boersma 2004).
1.     Given that lengthening is never attested in native vocabulary, what evidence would have
       caused Fijians to rank MAX STRESS above DEP MORA , and DEP MORA over PP-2 (as
       required to prevent the lengthening of unstressed vowels, choosing (e.g.) ta(âáko)
       ‘tobacco’ over *(tá:)(âáko))?
2.     Why do we find two different patterns for adaptation of proparoxytones like (kò:)(lóni)
       ‘colony’ and (kàli)(kó:) ‘calico’?
3.     Why do we find an asymmetry between Fijians’ interpretations of English pretonic tense
       vowels/diphthongs and final tense vowels/diphthongs? Kenstowicz (2003) notes that an
       English tense vowel before the English main stress is always realized as long (ò:méka
       ‘omega’, tò:píto ‘torpedo’), while an English tense vowel in final position may be
       realized as either long or short (kàlikó: vs. tò:píto, kò:lóni).

4.2. Stress and length: Perception-oriented analysis

         In Kenstowicz’s analysis, Fijians correctly perceive English stress, and their production
grammar constraints are ranked so as to preserve the English main stress, by vowel lengthening if
necessary. In contrast, Schütz (1978, 1983, 2004) proposes that “English words are interpreted in
Fijian in terms of an important phonological unit: the accent group” (Schütz 1983, page 566).
Both Kenstowicz and Schütz assume that lengthening is an effect of the imperative to maintain
similarity between the stress patterns of the English and Fijian forms; Schütz (1983, page 570)
argues that “For cases in which merely changing the placement of accent (and hence grouping)
would not improve the prosodic fit, syllables can be lengthened to attract the accent.” My
proposal is somewhat different: that Fijians actually misinterpret English stress as length in
certain contexts–that is, in mapping the acoustic signal of English words onto the phoneme
categories of their native language, Fijians use prominence patterns to decode phonemic length
contrasts.
         A Fijian vowel may be stressed either by virtue of occupying a prominence-conferring
position (head of a bisyllabic foot), or by being long. Therefore, in Fijian, any vowel that is
stressed and is not in a prominence-conferring position must be long. Because the grouping of
syllables into feet is predictable (in shorter words-- but see section 4.3 for discussion of longer
words), I assume that lexical representations for words of up to three syllables generally encode
length contrasts rather than footing contrasts, which are assigned by the production grammar on
the basis of the underlying arrangement of long and short vowels in a word.
         On this account, Fijians hear a final stressed vowel (as in mbazá: ‘bazaar’) as long
because in Fijian, the only way a final vowel can achieve greater prominence than the vowel
preceding it is by virtue of being long. In contrast, a penultimate stressed vowel (as in taâáko
‘tobacco’) need not be analyzed as long, because it occurs in a prominence-conferring position.
The variation seen in stressed antepenultimate vowels (as in kàlikó: ‘calico’ vs. to:píto ‘torpedo’
or kò:lóni ‘colony’) also makes sense: as Schütz (1983) points out, the Fijian grammar provides
two possible routes to prominence in this position: as head of a bisyllabic foot (as in (kàli)(kó:))
or as a long vowel (as in (kò:)(lóni)). I will argue below that the variation is not entirely random,
but instead depends on subphonemic cues: inherent length differences in English vowels, which
Fijian listeners interpret as signalling contrastive length differences.
         The asymmetric behavior of pretonic and posttonic vowels also falls out from this
account. While we see variation in the lengthening of final posttonic vowels (kàlikó: ‘calico’ vs.
                                          Ellen Broselow

to:píto ‘torpedo’), tense vowels immediately preceding the English main stressed syllable are
consistently lengthened, as in ò:méka, while lax prestressed vowels, as in pa±áma, are not. Lax
vowels, of course, are unstressed in English, while tense vowels in prestress position receive
some degree of stress. Apparently, Fijian listeners interpret the different prominence patterns of
words like ‘omega’ and ‘pajama’ in accord with the principles of Fijian grammar, which does not
allow adjacent stressed monomoraic syllables (Schütz 1978, 1983, 2004). The secondary
prominence on the initial syllable of ‘omega’ translates to the Fijian pattern illustrated by
(mà:)(ðáwa) ‘week’; the last two (strong-weak) syllables form a bisyllabic trochaic foot, and the
antepenultimate syllable receives stress by virtue of its long vowel. In contrast, the closest
analogue to the prominence pattern of ‘pajama’, with a single stress in penultimate position, is
found in words like ma(káwa) ‘old’.
        We can formalize these observations in a set of perception grammar constraints which
allow Fijian speakers to decode the acoustic cues of English to determine the prominence profile
of a word and from that to recover the length contrasts which, in Fijian, determine foot structure.
(For the moment, I will equate prominence with stress, though this will be refined shortly).
These constraints are presumably precisely the same ones that Fijian speakers use to determine
the lexical representations of unfamiliar native words, as they spell out the contexts in which
prominence signals vowel length:

(32)   Fijian Perceptual Mapping Constraints:
       a. FINALVLONG : If the final V is more prominent than the preceding V, then assume it is
       long.
       b. CLASH 6LONG : If two prominent vowels are adjacent, assume the first V is long (that is,
       a stress clash signals length).
       c. *LONG V: Assume all vowels are short.

Consider first contrasts in bisyllabic words like õgitá: ‘guitar’ vs. fíâa/âíâa ‘fever’. The input to
the perception grammar is the source pronunciation, from which the listener must extract the
phonological structure. I assume that Fijian listeners hear the main stress in the English surface
form, indicated as a stress mark on the English phonetic form in square brackets, as a prominence
peak, though not necessarily the only such peak in a word. The listener’s job is then to translate
the acoustics of the English form, including its prominence pattern, into a representation that
encodes the significant contrasts of the borrower’s language. In Fijian, this involves determining
where stress is a function of position and where stress is a function of length. Again, I assume
that mapping to the phonological and the lexical forms takes place in parallel; here I concentrate
on the recovery of the length contrasts on which footing is parasitic.
(33) inputs to perception grammar: ‘guitar’, ‘fever’
 [gvtá]                                     FINALVLONG                 CLASH 6LONG         *LONG V
   a. |õgi:ta:|                                                                            **!
   b. |õgita|                                          *!
   c. |õgi:ta|                                         *!                                  *
 Ld. |õgita:|                                                                              *
 [fívc] 6 /(fívc)/                          FINALVLONG                 CLASH 6LONG         *LONG V
   a. |fi:âa:|                                                                             *!*
 Lb. |fiâa|
   c. |fi:âa|                                                                              *!
   d. |fiâa:|                                                                              *!

These same constraints will derive the contrast between proparoxytones with unstressed vs.
stressed initial vowels; the perceived length of secondarily stressed vowels before the main
stressed vowel is on this account a function of CLASH 6LONG .

(34) inputs to perception grammar: English ‘pajama’, ‘omega’
 [pc®ámc]                       FINALVLG                    CLASH 6LONG              *LONG V
 L a. |pa±ama|
    b. |pa:±ama|                                                                     *!
    c. |pa±ama:|                                                                     *!
    d. |pa:±ama:|                                                                    *!*
 [òmégc]
     a. |omeka|                                             *! (ò,é)
 L b. |o:meka|                                                                       *
     c. |omeka:|                                            *! (ò,é)                 *
     d. |o:meka:|                                                                    **!

         The constraints above also predict the final lengthening in ‘calico’ if we assume that
listeners perceive the final full vowel of ‘calico’ as more prominent than the reduced penultimate
vowel:
                                            Ellen Broselow

(35) input to perception grammar: English ‘calico’
 [kælvko]                        FINALVLG              CLASH 6LONG               *LONG V
    a. |kaliko|                  *! (o>v)
    b. |ka:liko|                 *! (o>v)                                        *
 L c. |kaliko:|                                                                  *
    d. |ka:liko:|                                                                **!

However, as noted above, not all words with stress patterns similar to ‘calico’ are adapted with
final lengthening; alongside kàlikó: ‘calico’ we find kò:lóni ‘colony’. We can account for this
variability in the interpretation of poststress vowels if we assume that the information Fijian
speakers use in determining the relative prominence of vowels includes finer phonetic details,
such as inherent length differences. Schütz’s (1978) corpus of Fijian loanwords contains fifteen
words which are trisyllabic in English, have initial stress in English, and are realized as
trisyllabic in Fijian (that is, do not undergo vowel insertion). Of these fourteen, five follow the
‘colony’ pattern of initial lengthening (36a), seven follow the ‘calico’ pattern of final lengthening
(36b), and three have no lengthening, thereby losing the original English stress (36c); the latter
group perhaps represent borrowings through orthography:
(36)    English Trisyllabic Proparoxytones
a.      Fijian (ó:)(óó)
        colony          (kò:)(lóni)
        company         (kà:)(mbáni)
        taffeta         (tà:)(féta)
        Lucifer         (lù:)(séfa)
        governor        (kò:)(âána)
b.      Fijian (óó)(ó:)
        calico          (kàli)(kó:)
        polio           (pòli)(ó:)
        radio           (rèti)(ó:)
        editor          (èndi)(tá:)
        battery         (mbàti)(rí:)
        motorcar        (mòto)(ká:)
        pinafore        (vìni)(vó:)
c.      Fijian ó(óó)
        cylinder        si(lída)
        officer         o(âísa)
        vinegar         âi(níõga), âi(níka)12

Although the prosody of the adapted form is not entirely predictable, neither is the choice of
strategy entirely random. First, final [o] is always long in the adapted form. There are good
phonetic reasons why [o] might be more often interpreted as underlyingly long than final [i] (or
[w]) or schwa. As is well established, English vowels exhibit inherent length differences
independent of the increased length conferred by stress or intonation. Average durations for
American English (using Crystal and House’s notation) are presented below:

(37)    American English V durations (Crystal and House 1988):
        ]w > au > ai > o > ] >  > a > ei > æ > f > u > i > ...
        298 202 160 155 146 138 134 133 131 116 114 107...msec

Thus, while ‘calico’ and ‘colony’ are similar in their prosodic structures, they differ in the
inherent durations of their final vowels, with [o] on average nearly 50ms longer than [i] (even
assuming a source pronunciation with a tense final [i]).
        Evidence exists that inherent vowel length differences of this type, though not
linguistically significant in English, may influence speakers of other languages. Peng and Ann
(2001) have found, in Singapore English, Nigerian English, and the English of Spanish speakers,
pronunciations like illusTRAtor, frusTRAted, exerCISE, CHInese, autoBIography. Based on a
survey of such unfaithful stressings, they conclude that “If a multisyllabic word develops a
primary stress placement distinct from L1, primary stress in L2 falls on the syllable whose vowel
lasts the longest” (Peng and Ann 2001, page 14). Furthermore, Kiparsky (2004, page 22) argues


        12
            Schütz (1983, page 571) points out that “vowel lengthening is common for English words ending in -r” as
in motoka: ‘motorcar’, but that some forms “have become standardized without compensatory lengthening, and as a
result, the prosodic fit seems rather loose.”
                                          Ellen Broselow

that in Finnish, “the sonority hierarchy determines fixed secondary stress in loanwords”, with
vowels of greater sonority attracting stress. The stress-sonority relationship obtains in various
native language grammars as well; for example, in Gujarati (de Lacy 2002, 2006), the preference
for penultimate stress (apwána ‘to give’) is overridden in favor of stressing a syllable containing
[a] rather than some less sonorous vowel (pátini ‘wife’, hoijár ‘clever’). Although “loanwords
often retain the source language’s stress in defiance of the stress rules” (de Lacy 2006, page 242),
Kiparsky (2004) points out that some borrowed words, such as sinemá ‘cinema’, do change their
stress pattern to accord with the sonority-stress relationship.
         The lengthening of final [o] in words like ‘calico’ and the lack of lengthening of the
prosodically similar final [i] in words like ‘colony’ can now be seen as an interpretation of
relative prominence based in part on inherent duration of the English vowels, as compared to the
expected duration of the corresponding Fijian vowel categories with which they are identified.
The Fijian listeners’ task in interpreting the lexically significant features of an unfamiliar
trisyllabic word is to determine which syllable, if any, contains a long vowel. The final vowel of
‘calico’ is significantly longer than the penultimate vowel, but the final vowel of ‘colony’ is
shorter–too close to its reduced neighbor to be identified as long. The initial vowel of ‘colony’,
on the other hand, is inherently longer than the other two vowels of the word, and this length
difference is further enhanced by the main stress on this vowel, making it a good candidate for
analysis as an underlyingly long vowel. We can encode this pattern by means of one additional
constraint in our perception grammar:

(38)   ANTEPENULT VLONG : If the antepenultimate V is more prominent than the final or
       penultimate vowel, then assume the antepenultimate V is long.

The tableau below illustrates the mapping of the source words to underlying representations.
bringing ANTEPENULT VLONG into play. In ‘calico’ (realized as (kàli)(kó:)) the initial vowel
receives the durational enhancement of main stress, but the final vowel has the benefit of
inherently greater length, making them comparable. In ‘colony’(realized as (kò:)(lóni)), on the
other hand, the initial vowel has the advantage over the remaining vowels in the word both in
terms of stress-based prominence and inherent duration. The initial vowel of ‘vinegar’ (realized
as âi(níõga)), in contrast, is too short relative to the other vowels to be perceived as underlyingly
long:
(39) inputs to Fijian perception grammar: English proparoxytones ‘calico’, ‘colony’, ‘vinegar’
 [kæ’lvko]                 FINALVLG          CLASH 6LONG           ANTEPVLG            *LONG V
   a. |kaliko|              *! (o>v)                               /(æ .o)
   b. |ka:liko|             *! (o>v)                                                    *
 Lc. |kaliko:|                                                     /(æ .o)              *
   d. |ka:liko:|                                                                        **!
 [k]’lcni]
   a. |koloni|                                                     *! (] >c,i)
 L b.|ko:loni|                                                                         *
    c. |koloni:|                                                   *! (] > c,i)        *
    d. |ko:loni:|                                                                      **!
 [vw’ncgc]
 La. |âiniõga|
   b. |âi:niõga|                                                                       *!
   c. |âiniõga:|                                                                       *!
   d. |âi:niõga:|                                                                      *!*

While in principle any vowel of a trisyllabic form could be long in the underlying representation,
the Fijian production grammar limits the positions in which length contrasts are manifested.
Recall that long vowels are shortened in penultimate position when they precede a short vowel,
as illustrated in (26) síâi ‘exceed’ (the underlying long vowel surfaces in sì:âí-ta ‘exceed,
trans.’). Furthermore, Schütz (1999) notes a tendency for prepenultimate vowels to shorten
where their shortening makes possible incorporation of the long syllable into a bimoraic foot.
This shortening is illustrated in the form vakata:kila: ‘reveal it’ in which “the first vowel...retains
its length only in a formal pronunciation” (Schütz 1999, page 140, note 4); “in faster speech” this
form is pronounced as (vaka)(taki)(la:) (Schütz 1999, page 145). Thus even though the
perception grammar constraints above make possible the analysis of a loanword on first
encounter as V:-V-V:, such a structure would most likely be altered to V-V-V: in less formal
speech, with this structure serving as the input to subsequent listeners.
         The underlying representations that emerge from the perception grammar, submitted to
the production grammar, will result in the footings below:
                                          Ellen Broselow

(40) inputs to Fijian production grammar: ‘calico’, ‘colony’, ‘vinegar’
 |kaliko:|                     ALIGN -R       TROCHAICFEET ,         MAX MORA        PARSE SYLL
                                              BIMORAIC
 La. [(kàli)(kó:)]
   b. [(kà)(líko:)]                           *!
   c. [ka (líko:)]                            *!                                     *
 |ko:loni|
    a. [(kò:lo)(ní)]                          *!*
 L b. [(kò:)(lóni)]
    c. [ko:(lóni)]                                                                   *!
 |âiniõga|
   a. [(âìni)(õgá)]                           *!
   b. [(âì)(níõga)]                           *!
 Lc. [âi(níõga)]                                                                     *

        In summary, the account above implements the generalization that upon encountering
new words, the Fijian listener must determine the position of lexically contrastive length, by
listening for prominence in positions where prominence is not automatic. The interpretation of
greater-than-expected relative length as signaling prominence is reasonable in terms of the Fijian
prosodic system; Scott (1948) describes stressed short vowels as “half long” (Scott 1948, page
743). Once the English forms have been mapped to Fijian underlying representations encoding
contrastive length distinctions, the production grammar of Fijian will assign stress precisely as it
does with native vocabulary. In this account, there is no need to assume loan-specific constraints
or rankings, since the task is the same for all new vocabulary, whether native or foreign: to map
the acoustic signal onto an underlying representation which encodes lexically contrastive
information, and to assign stress on the basis of that information.

4.3. Comparison of production-oriented and perception-oriented accounts

        We are now in a position to compare analyses of Fijian loanword adaptation. In
Kenstowicz’s analysis, the Fijian listener correctly perceives the position of main stress in the
English word. The production grammar limits the degree of perceptual deviance between
underlying and phonetic forms–specifically, by triggering lengthening of the English main
stressed vowel if necessary to preserve stress on that vowel. The constraints of the production
grammar refer only to phonological categories such as long vs. short, stressed vs. unstressed, and
participate in crucial ranking relationships that are motivated solely by the loanword data. The
second analysis, in contrast, assumes that lengthening of vowels in loanwords is an effect of a
perception grammar which allows listeners to recover from the acoustic signal those aspects of
the native language that are contrastive (such as vowel length). The representation provided by
the perception grammar then serves as input to the production grammar, which assigns stress
according to Fijian principles. The constraints of the perception grammar may refer to fine-
grained, non-categorical aspects of phonetic detail, such as relative vowel duration, predicting the
possibility of variation in words with similar English stress patterns but different relative inherent
vowel durations, as seen in kò:lóni ‘colony’ vs. kàlikó: ‘calico’ vs. âiníõga ‘vinegar’.
         At this point one might reasonably object that if a production grammar can account for
the Fijian patterns, there is no motivation for adding another component to the model. But in
fact, much of the analysis in the preceding section would be necessary to Kenstowicz’s analysis
as well. Given a proparoxytone with no underlying long vowels, Kenstowicz’s grammar would
always derive the kò:lóni ‘colony’ pattern. In order to derive the kálikó: ‘calico’ pattern, it is
crucial that Fijian listeners analyze the final vowel of ‘calico’ as long. Thus, along with the
production constraint MAX STRESS, the production analysis must contain an implicit perceptual
component that identifies certain source vowels as underlyingly long.
         However, Kenstowicz provides two additional arguments for the account of Fijian stress
based on a production grammar which preserves the English stress position. The first concerns
words longer than three syllables. Kenstowicz discusses words like (tále)âi(sóni) ‘television’
which, in contrast to native forms like li(námu)(nráu) ‘arm-2dual possessor’ (Hayes 1995, page
144), allow two adjacent unstressed syllables. The tolerance of stress lapse is, Kenstowicz
argues, in conflict with the native language grammar, which would favor the footing *ta
(léâi)(sóni); therefore, the actual footing of ‘television’ must be explained as a function of the
stress conserving constraint. This argument depends on the assumption that the native language
grammar provides a default footing pattern for strings of light syllables, an assumption
challenged by Schütz (1983), who argues that “Longer forms, especially those with an uneven
number of syllables, offer the potential for alternate groupings, dependent upon accent
placement” (Schütz 1983, page 569). Indeed, there seems to be consensus among writers on
Fijian that stress patterns in native vocabulary containing strings of more than four light syllables
are not predictable. For example, Hayes (1995), citing forms such as (mbáti)ka(síâi) ‘kind of
fish’, characterizes Fijian as “a language with predictable primary stress but phonemic secondary
stress” (Hayes 1995, page 144), and Kenstowicz (2003, page 9) concedes that “To the extent that
these items are no longer decomposed in the minds of Fijian speakers, there is a precedent for the
lapses observed in loans.” In other words, Fijian speakers cannot predict the footing pattern of
new words consisting of more than three light syllables, and must therefore listen for cues to
(lexically contrastive) footing in new words. It therefore seems reasonable that Fijian listeners
hearing English ‘television’ would interpret the prosodic pattern of this word as indicating that
the first two syllables form a bisyllabic foot. This is precisely the position of Schütz (1983),
who argues that in longer borrowings, “We assume that one grouping sounds closer to the
English model than the other” (Schütz 1983, page 569).
         A second argument for Kenstowicz’s stress preservation analysis concerns the treatment
of forms with epenthetic vowels. While trisyllabic forms with initial stress may undergo
lengthening of either the initial or the final syllable (kò:lóni vs. kàlikó:), initially-stressed words
                                                  Ellen Broselow

that become trisyllabic through medial epenthesis invariably lengthen the final syllable:13

(41)     Bisyllables with medial epenthesis
         (wísi)(kì:)           ‘whiskey’
         (ndòke)(tá:)          ‘doctor’
         (sìsi)(tá:)           ‘sister’
         (ráka)(âí:)           ‘rugby’

Kenstowicz’s (2003) analysis of the data in (41) makes use of a high-ranked constraint *v’,
which bans stress on epenthetic vowels. The most direct way to preserve stress on the initial
vowel in a word like ‘whiskey’ would be to lengthen it. But lengthening the initial vowel would
force the epenthetic vowel into the head of a bisyllabic foot, resulting in the nonoccurring
realization *(wì:)(síki), which violates *v’. Therefore, Fijians choose the alternate route of
lengthening the final vowel, which allows the initial syllable to be head of a bisyllabic foot:
(wìsi)(kí:). Kenstowicz appeals to these facts as an argument against a perceptual account of
lengthening, pointing out that “not all long vowels in Fijian adaptations can be attributed to a
putative equation of stress = length at the level of the perceptual scan (Silverman 1992). We
therefore conclude that the main stress of English is translated as a stress in Fijian rather than as a
length that in turn attracts a stress”(Kenstowicz 2003, page 10).
        Indeed, it seems highly unlikely that the final vowels of all forms with medial epenthesis
would be consistently perceived as longer than the preceding (stressed) vowel, as required to
explain the lengthening of final vowels in loanwords in the perception-based analysis outlined
above. However, this final lengthening is precisely what would be expected if words like
‘whiskey’ are perceived by the Fijian listener as trisyllabic forms. This is the proposal advanced
by Schütz (1978), who argues that “each English consonant that is not followed by a vowel is
interpreted as a Fijian CV syllable” (Schütz 1978, page 18). Schütz presents two arguments for
this view. First, the unaccented syllable of a bisyllabic foot is typically reduced, even in native
vocabulary, so that the phonetic distance between C and CV is fairly small: “certain syllables are
so reduced that their phonetic manifestation is merely a lengthened consonant” (Schütz 1978,
page 14). Second, the choice of epenthetic vowel is dependent on the preceding consonant, with
a preference for [u] after labials and [i] after coronals. This suggests “that the release of a
certain consonant in this class is perceived as a particular vowel” (Schütz 1978, page 22). In a
production-oriented approach, the choice of epenthetic vowel is an effect of the mandate to
minimize the perceptual distance between the (accurately perceived) English form and the output
of the Fijian production grammar. The perception-oriented approach advocated here would view
this instead as an effect of the interpretation of the English phonetics in terms of Fijian lexical
categories. Because, for example, an unstressed syllable [si] may be realized (noncontrastively)
as a lengthened [s] in Fijian, the Fijian listener maps the [s] of ‘whiskey’ to the sequence [si] in
underlying representation. On this view, the final vowel of ‘whiskey’ is clearly longer than what
is perceived as the preceding (highly reduced) vowel, and should be analyzed as long. Words


         13
          The sole exception to this generalization is si(líva) ‘silver’. Schütz’s 1978 corpus contains no parallel
words with final stress in the source pronunciation.
like ‘whiskey’ are thus similar to words like (kàli)(kó:) ‘calico’.
        This proposal is consistent with the adaptation patterns of words like ‘beacon’ or ‘belt’,
with an initial stressed syllable followed by either an unstressed vowel plus an epenthetic vowel,
or by two epenthetic vowels. Such forms, by hypothesis, will be perceived as trisyllabic. We
would expect the initial vowel to be perceived as clearly longer than the two following vowels
(and therefore, by ANTEPENULT VLONG , as long), just as in words like (kò:)(lóni) ‘colony’.
Indeed, words of this type always lengthen the initial vowel:

(42)   Epenthetic forms with antepenultimate lengthening
a.     (mbì:)(kéni)         ‘beacon’
       (mbò:)(nísi)         ‘bonus’
b.     (mbè:)(léti)         ‘belt’
       (fì:)(límu)          ‘film’

As Schütz (1990, page 121) points out, these words are subject to the same tendency toward
shortening that affects prepenultimate vowels in native vocabulary; Schütz cites shortened forms
mbeleti ‘belt’, bikeni ‘beacon’ and bonisi ‘bonus’.
       In contrast to epenthetic forms with initial English stress, forms with a stressed vowel
followed by a single epenthetic vowel do not lengthen the stressed vowel:

(43)   Epenthetic forms without lengthening
       mba (lúni)           ‘balloon’
       õga (rá±i)           ‘garage’

Again, these facts are consistent with the theory outlined above, since there is no perception
grammar constraint that would force a penultimate vowel followed by a less prominent vowel to
be analyzed as long.
         At this point we should ask why Fijian speakers behave differently from Huave speakers,
since in both languages the right edges of words are invariably aligned with the main stress foot.
In other words, stress in Fijian serves to signal phonemic vowel length contrasts, but also to mark
the edges of words. Why, then, do Fijians not attend to stress in the same way that Huave
speakers do, assuming a word boundary at the right edge of the stress foot? One possible answer
is that the languages are actually quite different in terms of the relationship between stress and
word edge: while Huave appears to have one clearly perceptible stress per word, Fijian has a rich
system of secondary stress which makes the strategy of projecting word edges after stressed
syllables a risky one.
                                         Ellen Broselow

5.      Conclusion
        One great virtue of the Optimality Theoretic approach is that it forces us to ask not only
whether a grammar is consistent with a set of data, but also how that grammar could have been
learned. In the cases discussed above, asking this question has led us to consider alternative
analyses of the data which shed light on the division of labor between the production and
perception modules of the grammar. We have now seen that loan adaptation in two languages,
both of which have been described by means of a crucially ranked production grammar
constraint demanding stress preservation in loanwords, is amenable to an alternative analysis in
which the mapping from the acoustic signal to underlying phonological representations is
mediated by the native language perception grammar. This mapping accounts for the facts of
loanword stress using only rankings (of both perception and production grammar constraints) that
are motivated by the native language data. In Huave, the preservation of source stress was
argued to reflect the demarcative function of Huave stress, while source stress preservation in
Fijian was argued to be a byproduct of the identification of stress with length.
        Our larger conclusion is that what at first appeared to be unlearnable rankings in the
production grammar are actually a reflection either of input frequency or of the workings of a
perception grammar. This approach has several desirable consequences. First, we can eliminate
loan-specific constraints like MATCH STRESS from the grammar. This in turn allows us to make
much stronger predictions about the range of possible adaptation patterns. For example, a model
that includes a MATCH STRESS constraint in the repertoire of production grammar constraints
predicts that all combinations of native stress system and stress conservation in loanword
adaptation should be logically possible, due to free ranking of MATCH STRESS. In contrast, a
model such as the one proposed above ties the treatment of stress in loanwords to the function of
stress in the native language. We would not expect, for example, to find a language that is like
Huave in all respects except that it ranks MATCH STRESS low.
        Much work obviously remains to be done in developing a complete model of native
language perception/decoding processes, but language contact phonology provides a rich source
of insights into this aspect of language.
                                             References

Alderete, John. 1999. Head dependence in stress-epenthesis interaction. In Ben Hermans and Marc
        van Oostendorp (eds.), The derivational residue in phonological Optimality Theory, 29-50.
        Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Altmann, Heidi. 2006. The perception and production of second language stress: a cross-linguistic
        experimental study. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Delaware.
Basri, Hasan. 1997. Phonological nativization of loanwords in Selayarese. Ms., Stony Brook
        University.
Basri, Hasan. 1999. Phonological and syntactic reflections of morphological structure in
        Selayarese. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stony Brook University.
Basri, Hasan, Ellen Broselow, and Daniel Finer. 2000. AClitics and crisp edges in Makassarese,@ in
        Catherine Kitto and Caroline Smallwood (eds.), Proceedings of the Sixth International
        Meeting of the Austronesian Formal Linguistics Association, 25-36. Department of
        Linguistics, University of Toronto.
Boersma, Paul. 1998. Functional Phonology: formalizing the interactions between articulatory and
        perceptual drives. The Hague: Holland Academic Graphics.
Boersma, Paul. 2000. The OCP in the perception grammar. Unpublished ms., available from
        Rutgers Optimality Archives ROA 435.
Boersma, Paul and Bruce Hayes. 2001. Empirical tests of the Gradual Learning Algorithm.
        Linguistic Inquiry 32, 1-44.
Boersma, Paul and Clara Levelt. 2000. Gradual Constraint-Ranking Learning Algorithm predicts
        acquisition order. Proceedings of the Child Language Research Forum 30, Stanford,
        California, 229-237.
Broselow, Ellen. 1993. Transfer and universals in second language epenthesis. In Susan Gass and
        Larry Selinker, eds., Language Transfer in Language Learning, 71-86.
        Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Broselow, Ellen. 1999. Stress, epenthesis, and segment transformation in Selayarese loans. In Steve
        S. Chang, Lily Liaw, and Josef Ruppenhofer (eds.) Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual
        Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 311-325. Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics
        Society.
Broselow, Ellen. 2004. Unmarked structures and emergent rankings in second language phonology.
        International Journal of Bilingualism 8, 51-65.
Broselow, Ellen, Su-I Chen, and Chilin Wang.1998. The emergence of the unmarked in second
        language acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 20, 261-280.
Broselow, Ellen and Zhang Xu. 2004. Differential difficulty in the acquisition of second language
        phonology. International Journal of English Studies 4, 135-163.
Crystal, Thomas and Arthur House (1988) The duration of American-English vowels: an overview.
        Journal of Phonetics 16, 263-84.
Cutler, Anne. 1988. The role of strong syllables in segmentation for lexical access. Journal of
        Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 14, 113-121.
Cutler, Anne and Sally Butterfield. 1992. Rhythmic cues to speech segmentation: evidence from
        juncture misperception. Journal of Memory and Language 31, 218-236.
Cutler, Anne, Katherine Demuth, and James McQueen. 2002. Universality versus language-
        specificity in listening to running speech. Psychological Science 13, 258-262.
                                          Ellen Broselow

Davidson, Lisa. 2000. Hidden rankings in the final state of the English grammar. Proceedings
        from HUMDRUM 1, Rutgers University.
Davidson, Lisa and Rolf Noyer. 1996. Loan phonology in Huave: nativization and the ranking of
        faithfulness constraints. In B. Agbayani and S. Tang, eds., WCCFL 15, 65-80. CSLI.
de Lacy, Paul. 2002. The formal expression of markedness. Ph.D. dissertation, University of
        Massachusetts at Amherst.
de Lacy, Paul. 2006. Markedness: reduction and preservation in phonology. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
Demuth, Katherine. 1996. The prosodic structure of early words. In James Morgan and Katherine
        Demuth (eds.), Signal to syntax: bootstrapping from speech to grammar in early
        acquisition, 171-184. Mahwah, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Diebold, A. Richard. 1961. Incipient bilingualism. Language 37, 97-112.
Dixon, R. M. W. 1988. A Grammar of Boumaa Fijian. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eckman, Fred. 1981. On the naturalness of interlanguage phonological rules. Language Learning
        31, 195-216.
Eddington, David. 2000. Spanish stress assignment within the analogical modeling of language.
        Language 76, 92-109.
Flege, James, and Richard Davidian. 1984. Transfer and developmental processes in adult foreign
        language speech production. Applied Psycholinguistics 5, 323-347.
Flege, James, Martin McCutcheon, and Steven Smith. 1987. The development of skill in producing
        word final English stops. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 82, 433-447.
Fleischhacker, Heidi. 2000. Cluster-dependent epenthesis asymmetries.
        http://www.linguistics.ucla.edu/people/grads/fleischhacker/uclawpl.pdf.
Gnanadesikan, Amalia [1995] 2004. Markedness and faithfulness constraints in child phonology. In
        René Kager, Joe Pater, and Wim Zonneveld (eds.) Constraints in Phonological Acquisition,
        73-108. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grijzenhout, Janet and Bertus van Rooij. 2001. Voicing phenomena in Zulu-English: an OT account
        of the emergence of the unmarked in second language acquisition. SFB 282 Working
        Papers, Nr. 119. (Revised version of Grijzenhout, Janet and Bertus van Rooij. 2000.
        Second language phonology: acquisition through gradual constraint demotion. Ms,
        Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf and Potchefstroomse Universiteit vir CHO, South
        Africa.)
Hayes, Bruce. 1995. Metrical Stress Theory: Principles and Case Studies. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.
Hayes, Bruce [1999] 2004. Phonological acquisition in Optimality Theory: the early stages. In René
        Kager, Joe Pater, and Wim Zonneveld, eds., Constraints in Phonological Acquisition, 158-
        203. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Isaacs, James and Lynsey Wolter. 2003. Vowel length, weight and stress in K’ichee’. Talk presented
        at TREND, 2003. http://people.ucsc.edu/~isaacs-wolter-trend.pdf.
Ito, Junko and Armin Mester. 1995. The core-periphery structure of the lexicon and constraints on
        reranking. In Jill Beckman, Laura Dickey, and Suzanne Urbanczyk, eds., Papers in
        Optimality Theory. University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics 18.
        Amherst, MA: GLSA.
Jusczyk, Peter. 1999. How infants begin to extract words from speech. Trends in Cognitive Science
        3, 323-328.
Kang, Yoonjung. 2003. Perceptual similarity in loanword adaptation: English post-vocalic word-
        final stops to Korean. Phonology 20, 219-274.
Kenstowicz, Michael. 2001. The role of perception in loanword phonology. Linguistique Africaine
        20.
Kenstowicz, Michael. 2003. Salience and similarity in loanword adaptation: a case study from
        Fijian. ROA 609-0803.
Kim, Yuni and Mischa Park-Doob. 2005. Fieldwork strategies for endangered dialects of Huave.
        LSA poster session on Challenges and Issues in Endangered Language Fieldwork.
        http://ist.socrates.berkeley.edu/~yuni/ling/lsa2005-huaveposter.pdf.
Kiparsky, Paul. 2004. Universals constrain change; change results in typological generalizations.
        Ms., www.stanford.edu/~kiparsky/Papers/cornell.pdf.
Kreger, Glenn and Emily Stairs. 1981. Diccionario Huave de San Mateo Del Mar. Tlalpan, Mexico:
        Instituto Lingüístico de Verano.
Lassettre, Paul and Patricia Donegan. 1998. Perception in Optimality Theory: The frugality of the
        base. In Benjamin Bergen, Madelaine Plauché, and Ashlee Bailey, eds., Proceedings of the
        24th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 346-355. Berkeley: Berkeley
        Linguistics Society.
Levelt, Clara and Ruben van de Vijver. [1998] 2004. Syllable types in cross-linguistic and
        developmental grammars. In René Kager, Joe Pater, and Wim Zonneveld, eds., Constraints
        in Phonological Acquisition, 204-218. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mithun, Marianne and Hasan Basri. 1986. The phonology of Selayarese. Oceanic Linguistics 25,
        210-252.
Mohanan, K. P. and Tara Mohanan. 2003. Towards a theory of constraints in OT: emergence of the
        not-so-unmarked in Malayalee English. ROA 601-0503.
Norris, Dennis, James McQueen, Anne Cutler, and Sally Butterfield. 1997. The possible-word
        constraint in the segmentation of continuous speech. Cognitive Psychology 34, 191-243.
Pater, Joe 1998. From phonological typology to the development of receptive and productive
        phonological competence: applications of minimal violation. Ms.
Peng, Long and Jean Ann. 2001. Stress and duration in three varieties of English. World Englishes
        20, 1-27.
Peperkamp, Sharon. In press. A psycholinguistic theory of loanword adaptations. Proceedings of
        the 30th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley
        Linguistic Society.
Peperkamp, Sharon. 2004. Lexical exception in stress systems: Arguments from early language
        acquisition and adult speech perception. Language 80, 98-126.
Peperkamp, Sharon and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2002. A typological study of stress ‘deafness’. In
        Carlos Gussenhoven and Natasha Warner (eds.) Laboratory Phonology 7, 203-240. Berlin;
        New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Prince, Alan and Bruce Tesar. [1999] 2004. Learning phonotactic distributions. In René Kager, Joe
        Pater, and Wim Zonneveld, eds., Constraints in Phonological Acquisition, 245-291.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ross, Kai 1996. Floating phonotactics: variability in infixation and reduplication of Tagalog words.
        Unpublished MA thesis, UCLA.
                                            Ellen Broselow

Scott, N. 1948. A study in the phonetics of Fijian. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
        Studies 12, 737-752.
Schütz, Albert. 1978. English loanwords in Fijian. In Albert Schütz, ed., Fijian language studies:
        Borrowing and pidginization. Bulletin of the Fiji Museum No. 4, 1-50.
Schütz, Albert. 1983. The accenting of English loanwords in Fijian. In Frederick Agard, Gerald
        Kelley, Adam Makkai, and Valerie Makkai (eds.), Essays in honor of Charles F. Hockett,
        565-572. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Schütz, Albert. 1990. Prosody and its effect on phonological processes in Fijian: a synchronic study.
        In Jeremy Davidson, ed., Pacific Island Languages: Essays in Honour of G. B. Milner, 119-
        127. Honolulu and London: University of Hawaii Press and School of Oriental and African
        Studies, University of London.
Schütz, Albert. 1999. Fijian accent. Oceanic Linguistics 38, 139-151.
Schütz, Albert. 2004. English loan words in Fijian. In Jan Tent and Paul Geraghty (eds.),
        Borrowing: a Pacific perspective, 253-294. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Silverman, Daniel. 1992. Multiple scansions in loanword phonology: evidence from Cantonese.
        Phonology 9, 289-328.
Steriade, Donca. 2001. The phonology of perceptibility effects: the P-map and its consequences for
        constraint organization. http://web.mit.edu/linguistics/www/bibliography/steriade.html.
Tesar, Bruce and Paul Smolensky. 1998. Learnability in Optimality Theory. Linguistic Inquiry 29,
        229-268.
Thiessen, Erik and Jenny Saffran. 2003. When cues collide: use of stress and statistical cues to word
        boundaries by 7- to 9-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology 39, 706-716.
Ussishkin, Adam and Andrew Wedel. 2003. Gestural motor programs and the nature of phonotactic
        restrictions: evidence from loanword phonology. In Mimu Tsujimura and Gina Garding,
        eds., Proceedings of WCCFL 22, 505-518. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Werker, Janet and Suzanne Curtin. 2005. PRIMIR: A developmental framework of infant speech
        processing. Language Learning and Development 1, 197-234.
Wissing, Daan and Wim Zonneveld. 996. Final devoicing as a robust phenomenon in second
        language acquisition: Tswana, English and Afrikaans. South African Journal of Linguistics,
        Supplement 34, 3-24.
Yavas, Mehmet. 1994. Final stop devoicing in interlanguage. In Yavas, Mehmet, ed., First and
        Second Language Phonology, 267-282. San Diego, CA: Singular.
Yip, Moira. 1993. Cantonese loan word phonology and Optimality Theory. Journal of East Asian
        Linguistics 2, 261-291.
Xu, Zhang. 2003. The interlanguage phonology of Mandarin learners of English and the Gradual
        Learning Algorithm. Ms., SUNY Stony Brook.

Department of Linguistics
Stony Brook University (SUNY at Stony Brook)
Stony Brook NY 11794-4376

ellen.broselow@stonybrook.edu
