                       CHAPTER TWELVE

      THE TYPOLOGY OF POSITION-QUALITY
      INTERACTIONS IN LOANWORD VOWEL
                 INSERTION1

                       ELLEN BROSELOW


                            1. Introduction
    The central question of phonology is how speakers generalize beyond
the data to which they have been exposed. One fruitful avenue of
investigation is through the study of loanwords, since foreign forms often
confront speakers with structures that do not appear in their native
language. This paper will focus on one problem in the adaptation of
borrowed words: how speakers adapt foreign words beginning in
consonant sequences when their native language not only lacks complex
onsets, but also lacks alternations that would provide evidence favoring
any specific repair of such structures. A survey of the adaptation of
complex onsets reveals that speakers of a wide range of languages have
converged on similar strategies, in which different repairs are used for
different types of onset clusters. The emergence of similar adaptation
patterns across genetically and geographically diverse languages raises
two questions: first, why do certain repair patterns emerge even in the
absence of apparent support from the data of either the native or the
foreign language? And second, why should these particular patterns be

1
 Portions of this paper were delivered to audiences at Utrecht University,
Manchester University, the University of Pennsylvania, Academia Sinica, Oxford
University, and Stony Brook University. I gratefully acknowledge the valuable
comments and suggestions of the audiences at those venues and from the
anonymous reviewer, as well as support from the National Science Foundation,
BCS-07460227.
     Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 293


widely attested across a range of recipient and source languages, while
other logically possible patterns are rare or non-existent?
    Speakers of languages that forbid complex syllable onsets have the
choice of two major strategies for bringing foreign consonant sequences
into conformity with native language restrictions: deletion of consonants
or insertion of vowels. Although consonant deletion does occur (e.g.,
Cantonese [fisa] ‘freezer’, Yip 1993; Finnish [ranta] ‘strand’ from
Swedish strand, Young-Scholten & Archibald 2000), a more common
strategy is insertion of a vowel to restructure an onset cluster into separate
syllables (Brasington 1981; Uffmann 2006, 2007).2 Where vowel insertion
is the preferred repair for complex onsets, biconsonantal clusters admit
two possible positions for an inserted vowel—either before or inside the
consonant cluster—while longer onsets admit additional possibilities.
Speakers are also faced with a choice in the quality of the inserted vowel,
which may be an invariant default, a contextually-determined vowel
which copies some or all the features of a nearby vowel and/or a
neighboring consonant, or some combination of these options.
    A number of studies have focused on the position of inserted vowels
(e.g., Broselow1983, 1992a, 1992b; Fleischhacker 2001, 2005), while
other studies have examined the quality of inserted vowels in borrowed
words (e.g., Kitto & de Lacy 1999; Rose & Demuth 2006; Uffmann 2006,
2007). To date, however, there has been no systematic investigation of the
connection between the position of the inserted vowel and its quality.
While these two factors, position and quality, are in principle independent,
I will present evidence that they do, in fact, interact in many languages, in a
specific way: the vowel inserted in pre-cluster position is an invariant
default, while the vowel inserted between two initial consonants is
contextually determined. This pattern is attested across a range of source and
recipient languages, while the opposite pattern appears never to occur. I will
investigate possible explanations for this emergent pattern, suggesting that
the copy vowels that appear inside onset clusters may arise in the mapping
of the foreign surface structure to a phonological representation.
    In §2, I review the facts of positional variation in vowel insertion as
well as previous accounts of this variation. §3 provides an overview of the
interaction between the position and the quality of the inserted vowel,
while §4 outlines possible analyses of this interaction, followed by a
summary in §5.

2
  This strong preference for vowel insertion over consonant deletion does not
extend to coda position (Brasington 1981). The asymmetries in the adaptation of
initial and final clusters is another interesting typological question, but beyond the
scope of this paper.
294                               Chapter Twelve


                     2. Position of inserted vowels
    Biconsonantal onsets present two possible sites for vowel insertion
(where “V” indicates an underlying and “v” an inserted vowel): anaptyxis
places the vowel within the cluster (CCV > Cv.CV) while prothesis places
the vowel before the cluster (CCV > vC.CV). 3 For languages lacking
syllable codas, the only possible vowel insertion site is following each
non-prevocalic consonant. The more interesting cases, however, involve
languages that permit syllable codas, since such languages in principle
permit a choice of insertion site. For speakers whose native language
provides no internal evidence for restrictions on possible coda consonants
or preference for particular syllable contacts, the following repair
strategies should all be feasible:

(1)       Logically possible repair patterns

          a. consistent Cv.CV
          b. consistent vC.CV
          c. random choice of Cv.CV or vC.CV

Yet the actual distribution is heavily skewed in favor of anaptyxis
(Cv.CV). Fleischhacker’s 2005 survey of vowel insertion patterns reveals
a number of languages favoring within-cluster insertion, even where the
output of prothesis would be well-formed. In contrast, Fleischhacker finds
only two candidates for consistent insertion of a vowel before the
cluster—Iraqi Arabic and Central SiberianYupik—and in both these
languages, the pre-cluster insertion in loanwords appears to reflect a repair
that is attested in the native language phonology as well (Broselow 1983;
Fleischhacker 2001, 2005). Thus, there is no convincing case of a
language in which a consistent strategy of prothesis appears to have arisen
spontaneously, independent of the native language grammar.
    However, it is not entirely accurate to claim that pre-cluster insertion
does not emerge in loanword adaptation. While consistent prothesis is
exceedingly rare, mixed systems—with insertion before certain onset

3
  I adopt the terminology of Fleischhacker’s (2005) insightful study of epenthesis
position. I also limit this study to the adaptation of foreign words beginning in two
consonants, since the data illustrating the adaptation of longer clusters are limited,
in large part because of the relative scarcity of source words involving initial
clusters of three consonants. However, a complete treatment of vowel insertion
will ultimately need to account not only for longer initial clusters but also for
word-internal and word-final clusters.
      Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 295


cluster types and within other types–are surprisingly common. These
patterns do not, however, instantiate possibility (1c) above, as the choice
of prothesis vs. anaptyxis is not random, but rather systematic. These cases
are discussed in the next section.

                            2.1 Mixed patterns
    As has long been recognized, many languages show adaptation
patterns in which the position of an inserted vowel is dependent on the
composition of the onset cluster. In Cairene Arabic, for example, a vowel
is inserted within an onset cluster of rising sonority (that is, an obstruent
followed by a sonorant (resonant) consonant), but before a cluster
consisting of /s/-stop:

(2)       Cairene Arabic borrowings from English (Broselow 1983; Hinds
          & Badawy 1986; Galal 2004)

          a. firiizar                 ‘freezer’
             bilastik                 ‘plastic’
             birinter                 ‘printer’
             kirimbilin               ‘Crimplene’
             silajd                   ‘slide’
             siwetar                  ‘sweater’

          b. ‫ݦ‬iskii                   ‘ski’
             ‫ݦ‬istadi                  ‘study’
             ‫ݦ‬ispiriƾ                 ‘spring’

The same pattern appears in Makkan Arabic (Ahyad 2013):4

(3)       Makkan Arabic borrowings from English

          a. birek                    ‘break’

          b. ‫ݦ‬iskaib                  ‘skype’

This pattern is not limited to Arabic dialects; similar patterns are found in
borrowings from English into two Indo-Aryan languages, Hindi and
4
 In both Cairene and Makkan Arabic, the high round vowel [u] may appear as the
anaptyxctic vowel when the next lexical vowel is round. I return to this in the
discussion of vowel quality.
296                            Chapter Twelve


Central Pahari, where /s/-stop and /sf/ onsets undergo prothesis while other
onsets undergo anaptyxis:

(4)      Hindi borrowings from English (Singh 1985)

         a. fܼrut                     ‘fruit’
            pܼlܼz                     ‘please’
            sܼlܼper                   ‘slipper’

         b. ܼsp‫ܭ‬liƾ                   ‘spelling’
            ܼskul                     ‘school’
            ܼsfiԥr                    ‘sphere’

(5)      Central Pahari borrowings from English (Sharma 1980)

         a. kilip          ‘clip’
            silet          ‘slate’

         b. istuul         ‘stool’
            ispii‫ݹ‬         ‘speech’

This pattern is surprising, for several reasons. First, speakers of languages
with only single-consonant onsets receive no direct evidence for
differential treatment of rising sonority vs. falling sonority onset clusters
from their native language, where neither type occurs. Nor do the lending
languages provide any obvious motivation for distinguishing obstruent-
sonorant onsets from obstruent-obstruent onsets, since both types are
realized faithfully in the foreign language. While, as Fleischhacker (2005)
points out, insertion of a vowel within an /s/-stop onset would in some
cases necessitate an additional change—from the unaspirated stop
allophone that follows /s/ to the aspirated stop allophone that occurs
intervocalically before a stressed vowel–this explanation is specific to
English. However, the differential treatment of the two onset types cannot
rest solely in the phonetic characteristics of the English clusters, because
this asymmetric pattern emerges in a wide range of both borrowing
languages and source languages.            Borrowings from Sanskrit into
Sinhalese, for example, exhibit the same pattern of prothesis before /s/-
stop and anaptyxis elsewhere:
      Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 297


(6)       Sinhalese, from Sanskrit (Samarajiwa & Abeysekera 1964)

            Sinhalese       Sanskrit
          a. tijage         tjage              ‘gift’
             tirividԥ       trividԥ            ‘triple’
             sirijavԥ       srijavԥ            ‘grace’

          b. istiri         stri               ‘woman’

The anaptyxis/prothesis pattern is also evidenced in borrowings from
French to Wolof (Broselow 1992b; Fleischhacker 2005) and to Fula
(Paradis & LaCharité 1997), and from Russian to Kazakh (Fleischhacker
2005) and to Kirgiz (Gouskova 2002). Thus, to maintain an explanation of
this pattern as a response to some acoustic or perceptual factors in the
signal (channel bias, in the terminology of Moreton 2008), we would need
to identify triggering factors that are constant across all these genetically
and geographically distinct languages. In the absence of such evidence,
the anaptyxis/prothesis pattern presents a paradigm case of an emergent
pattern: one that could not be directly learned from the linguistic data
available to the speaker.
    Furthermore, this asymmetric repair pattern challenges the
fundamental Optimality Theory assumption that illegal structures are
repaired with minimal violation of faithfulness constraints. In Cairene
Arabic, prothesis represents a particularly inefficient repair choice;
because vowel-initial syllables are banned in Arabic, pre-cluster insertion
necessitates an additional repair, the insertion of a glottal stop before the
inserted vowel. No ranking of the familiar markedness constraints
*COMPLEXONSET, ONSET, NOCODA and faithfulness constraints DEPV,
DEPC will choose the winning forms with pre-cluster insertion, as
illustrated by the tableau below, in which the actual output form [‫ݦ‬is.kii]
violates three constraints: the markedness constraint NOCODA and the
faithfulness constraints DEPV and DEPC:
298                              Chapter Twelve


(7) Cairene Arabic


    /ski/   ‘ski’   *COMPLE         ONSET      DEPV         DEPC        NOCODA
                     XONSET

      a. skii           *!

    ☞ b. si.kii                                *

      c. is.kii                     *          *                         *

    ¥d. ‫ݦ‬is.kii                                *           *             *

Note that (7b), which should be the winner under any ranking, would
constitute an entirely unobjectionable surface structure in this language
(cf. [sikitt] ‘I became quiet’). Yet apparently there must be some
additional factor that favors prothesis in forms beginning in /s/-stop
clusters.5
    One possible explanation of the anaptyxis/prothesis pattern might
appeal to universal markedness differences based on sonority. In Broselow
(1992b), it is argued that regardless of native language, speakers have
knowledge of a universal sonority continuum comprising, in order of
increasing sonority, stops-fricatives-nasals-liquids-glides-vowels, along
with an inviolable requirement that onset sequences must not fall in
sonority (Selkirk 1982; Parker 2008). If these principles are indeed
universal, they should lead speakers who encounter falling-sonority onsets
to assume that these onsets cannot represent two independent segments,
but rather share a linked representation that protects them (like true
geminates) from being split by vowel insertion.6
    While Broselow’s analysis rests on the assumption that anaptyxis is the
preferred option, Gouskova (2002) argues that the faithfulness constraint
CONTIGUITY, which bans insertion within a morpheme, favors pre-cluster
insertion. However, Gouskova argues, prothesis may be blocked by a

5
  Repair of triconsonantal onsets also presents a challenge to the principle of
minimal change from input to output. While insertion of a single vowel between
the first two consonants would yield a legal syllable structure (e.g., street >
[sit.riit]), the actual form is [‫ݦ‬is.ti.riit], with three violations of faithfulness
incurred by insertion of two vowels plus insertion of a glottal stop.
6
  Following Browman and Goldstein’s (1986) proposal that English onsets allow
only a single laryngeal specification, Broselow argued that /s/-stop onsets share a
linked laryngeal node.
      Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 299


competing markedness constraint, SYLLABLECONTACT, which bans a
coda-onset sequence of rising sonority. The result of prothesis in a
heterosyllabic /s/-stop sequence ([is.kii] ‘ski’) is consistent with both
CONTIGUITY and SYLLABLECONTACT, but the latter constraint would block
prothesis in a form like [ib.las.tik] ‘plastic’ due to the illegal syllable
contact [b.l].
    On both these approaches, the asymmetric insertion pattern represents
an emergence of the unmarked effect (McCarthy & Prince 1994)—
speakers respond to a markedness constraint for which their native
language provides no direct evidence, but which is presumably part of
their innate linguistic knowledge. In support of the anaptyxis/prothesis
pattern as reflection of universal principles, Broselow (1992b) argued that
the same asymmetric pattern is not restricted to loanword phonology; it
also appears in a native language, Modern Western Armenian, where
surface schwa is inserted between members of onsets of rising sonority
(8a) or equal sonority (8b), but before fricative-stop onsets (8c):

(8)       Modern Western Armenian (Bardakjian & Thompson 1977;
          Broselow 1992b)

            Input           Surface
          a. grag           gԥrag              ‘fire’
             vnas           vԥnas              ‘harm’
             hnar           hԥnar              ‘resource’
             srel           sԥrel              ‘sharpen’

          b. nman           nԥman              ‘similar’

          c. stapil         ԥstapil            ‘come to one’s senses’
             spopel         ԥspopel            ‘console’
             skanceli       ԥskanceli          ‘wonderful’
             ‫ݕ‬tapel         ԥ‫ݕ‬tapel            ‘hurry’

    However, these emergences of the unmarked accounts face both
theoretical and empirical problems. First, in Optimality Theory, constraint
rankings are assumed to be learned from the data to which the learner is
exposed. Where neither the native nor the foreign language appears to
present evidence for crucial loanword rankings, the burden of proof lies on
the analyst to explain the source of those rankings.7The anaptyxis/prothesis
7
  See, e.g., Peperkamp 2005, Broselow 2009, Kang 2011 for more detailed
discussion of the learnability issues surrounding loanword phonology.
300                            Chapter Twelve


pattern requires a number of crucial rankings: not only the ranking of the
markedness constraint SYLLABLECONTACT over CONTIGUITY, which
favors prothesis, but also the ranking of CONTIGUITY over ANCHOR-LEFT
(STEM, PWORD), which demands that the leftmost segment of the stem
have a correspondent at the left edge of the word, thereby favoring
anaptyxis. To explain how speakers arrive at these rankings, one would
need to demonstrate for each adaptation case that each ranking either is
learnable from ambient data, or represents a universal default. A full
treatment of this issue would require analysis of clusters in all positions
within the word.
    The purely sonority-based explanations face an empirical problem as
well: the distinction between rising vs. falling sonority onsets is not
sufficient to account for the range of patterns found across languages.
Fleischhacker (2005), in the most extensive survey to date of loanword
vowel insertion sites, found that in a number of languages, including
Kazakh, Farsi, and the Hindi of some speakers, rising sonority clusters
consisting of a sibilant fricative (/s/, /‫ݕ‬/) followed by a resonant consonant
(nasal, liquid, glide) may undergo prothesis rather than anaptyxis, and that
in fact, the same cluster may exhibit variation within a single language.
Thus, sonority is not entirely predictive, although is also not entirely
irrelevant; fricative-sonorant onsets with a steeper sonority rise (e.g., /s/-
glide) are more likely to undergo anaptyxis, while those in which the
second consonant has lower sonority (e.g., /s/-nasal) are more likely to
undergo prothesis. As the following data illustrate, Fleischhacker’s Farsi
consultant repaired sibilant-nasal and sibilant-[l] clusters via prothesis and
sibilant-[r] and sibilant-[w] clusters via anaptyxis:

(9)      Farsi (Fleischhacker 2005)

         a. esmintian                 ‘Smintian’
            e‫ݕ‬las                     ‘Schloss’

         b. seri laƾka                ‘Sri Lanka’
            sevanhild                 ‘Schwanhild’ (~[sowanhild])

    Given, as Fleischhacker points out, that the mixed pattern cannot be
attributed to a simple categorical difference between falling sonority and
rising sonority onsets, some other explanation is necessary. Fleischhacker
proposes, following work by Steriade (2001), that the driving force behind
the mixed pattern is the imperative to maintain the minimal perceptual
distance between input and output. Fleischhacker presents evidence from
       Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 301


a variety of sources, including near puns, alliterative patterns,
reduplication, and experimental investigation of similarity judgements,
supporting the hypothesis that obstruent-resonant (OR) clusters (i.e., an
obstruent followed by a nasal, liquid, or glide) are perceived as more
similar to OvR than to vOR, while the same relationship does not hold for
sibilant fricative-stop (ST) clusters and SvT. As expected from the
variable adaptation of sibilant fricative-resonant clusters like /sm/,
listeners vary in their judgements of the similarity of clusters containing
sibilant fricatives (/s, ‫ݕ‬/) followed by resonants vis-à-vis anaptyctic SvT
and prothetic vST. Fleischhacker proposes a set of similarity-sensitive
correspondence constraints prohibiting the insertion of vowels in specific
contexts, with the fixed ranking shown below, where S = sibilant fricative;
T=stop, N=nasal, L=liquid, and R=resonant consonant:

(10)       Correspondence constraints (Fleischhacker 2001, 2005)

           DEP-V/S-T >> DEP-V/S_N >> DEP-V/S_L >> DEP-V/T_R

The point at which CONTIGUITY is ranked within this hierarchy determines
the choice of anaptyxis vs. prothesis for individual clusters, but the fixed
ranking implies that vowel insertion may not separate /s/-stop clusters
unless it also separates other clusters. Zuraw (2007) presents additional
evidence of a preference for maintaining contiguity of the members of /s/-
stop onsets. In her investigation of Tagalog speakers’ preferred placement
of VC infixes in non-native words beginning with various cluster types,
Zuraw found that placement of the infix within an /s/-stop onset (e.g., s-
VC-pin) was less likely and was judged less acceptable than placement
after the cluster (sp-VC-in). In other /s/-consonant onsets, the acceptability
of the within-cluster placement tended to increase with increasing sonority
of the second consonant.
    Fleischhacker’s proposal predicts that the preferred repair of a non-
native cluster should be the one that is most difficult to discriminate from
the original structure. Subsequent research on the relationship between the
pronunciation of unfamiliar onset clusters and the discriminability of
different repairs by Shaw and Davidson (2011) and Davidson and Shaw
(2012) has revealed that such correlations are strong but not perfect. They
found, for example, that while the most frequent production error for non-
English fricative-nasal sequences was FvN, the most difficult pair for
English speakers to discriminate was FN-vFN. Nonetheless,
Fleischhacker’s insight into the crucial role played by the perceptual
distance between original and repaired forms in loan adaptation represents
302                                Chapter Twelve


a significant advance in our understanding of these patterns, one that we
will return to in our discussion of the interaction in the position and the
quality of the inserted vowel.

        3. Interaction of vowel position and vowel quality
      As Hall (2011: 1590) notes,

      “the patterns of vowel quality in loanwords are often strikingly complex in
      ways that are not common (and perhaps not attested at all) in native
      language epenthesis.”

Nonetheless, we may identify some clear trends. First, certain languages
have a single preferred default vowel. The identity of this vowel may vary
from language to language—for example, /u/ in Japanese and /i/ in
SeTswana, as illustrated in their respective adaptations of ‘Christmas’ as
[kurisumasu] and [kirisimasi]. Alternatively, loans may be adapted via
insertion of a contextually-determined vowel, which may share some or all
features with a nearby vowel, may share features with a neighboring
consonant, or may show some combination of the effects of both vowel
and consonant context. In these cases, the quality of the inserted vowel is
often highly variable and not fully predictable; the reader is referred to
Uffmann (2007) for careful case studies of the relationship between vowel
quality and context.
    Just as many languages exhibit mixed systems in the position of the
inserted vowel, many languages also show mixed systems of vowel
quality. Furthermore, as with positional variation, the choice among
available options—in this case, the choice between a default vowel and a
contextually determined vowel—is in many languages largely systematic.
Mahato (1974) reports that Bengali (Mahato 1974) exhibits the familiar
pattern of anaptyxis in rising sonority onsets but prothesis in fricative-stop
onsets. The interesting fact, for our purposes, is that the quality of the
vowel varies by position, with [e] inserted within obstruent-resonant
clusters, as in (11a), but [i] before S-stop clusters, as in (11b):

(11)        Bengali borrowings from English (Mahato 1974)

            a. gela‫ݕ‬           ‘glass’
               ‫ݕ‬elet           ‘slate’

            b. i‫ݕ‬kul           ‘school’
               istæmp          ‘stamp’
       Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 303


    We see a somewhat different (but ultimately more common) pattern of
position-quality interaction in the Dravidian language Telugu (Rao 1986).
Telugu shows variation between the two major strategies of complex onset
nativization, consonant deletion and vowel insertion. When consonant
deletion is employed, it is the more sonorous consonant that deletes: the
second in a rising sonority onset, and the first in a fricative-stop onset.
When a vowel is inserted, the position of the inserted vowel follows the
now familiar anaptyxis/prothesis pattern, and the quality of the inserted
vowel varies according to position: the anaptyctic vowel is a copy of the
following vowel, while a prothetic vowel is a default [i]:

(12)       Telugu borrowings from English (Rao 1986)

           a. galasu ~ gasu                     ‘glass’

           b. iste‫ ݕ‬ԥnu ~ te‫ ݕ‬ԥnu               ‘station’

This pattern–insertion of a copy vowel within clusters, but insertion of a
default vowel before clusters–turns out to be surprisingly common across
a wide range of genetically distinct language families. We find the same
pattern in borrowings from French into the Niger-Congo language Fula
(Paradis & LaCharité 1997):

(13)       Fula borrowings from French (Paradis & LaCharité 1997)

              Fula            French
           a. birik‫ܭ‬t         brik‫ܭ‬             ‘lighter’ (‘briquet’)
              kala:s          klas              ‘class’ (‘classe’)
              darap‫ܧ‬          drapo             ‘flag’ (‘drapeau’)

           b. istati          staty             ‘statue’ (‘statue’)

Furthermore, the same pattern appears in borrowings from English into the
Sino-Tibetan language Sherpa, in which the only possible complex onset
in native words is a consonant followed by a glide (Sherpa 2012). In a
study of established loanwords, Sherpa (2012) found that English
consonant-glide onsets were preserved (the only examples in the database
contained [sw]). Complex onsets were otherwise repaired by vowel
insertion which varied in both position and quality. The database
contained thirteen forms adapted from English words beginning in stop-
liquid clusters and one beginning in fricative-liquid, all of which were
304                            Chapter Twelve


adapted by insertion of a copy vowel between the onset consonants, and
four English words beginning in /s/-stop, all adapted by insertion of [i]
before the onset cluster:

(14)     Sherpa (Sherpa 2012)

         a. balaƾket                            ‘blanket’
            baljak‫ݚ‬i                            ‘black tea’
            palan                               ‘plan’
            palas‫ݚ‬ik                            ‘plastic’
            berek                               ‘break’
            poro‫ݚ‬in                             ‘protein’
            porogaram                           ‘program’
            ‫ݚ‬eren                               ‘train’
            ‫ݚ‬arak                               ‘truck’
            ‫ܩ‬aram                               ‘drum’
            kalaimet                            ‘climate’
            kilinik                             ‘clinic’
            kirismas                            ‘Christmas’
            ‫ݕ‬irim                               ‘shrimp’

         b. isku‫ݚ‬ar                             ‘scooter’
            iskin                               ‘skin’
            iskil                               ‘skill’
            iskalar‫ݕ‬ip                          ‘scholarship’

The single form based on an English word beginning with a sibilant-liquid
cluster (‘shrimp’) patterns with other obstruent-resonant clusters in taking
an anaptyctic vowel, although this vowel cannot be clearly identified as
either a copy or default vowel, since the following vowel is /i/, which also
appears as the default vowel before /s/-stop. Unfortunately the database
does not contain adaptations of initial /s/-nasal or /s/-liquid clusters, the
structures most likely in Fleischhacker’s data to exhibit variability in the
position of the inserted vowel, and the medial /sm/ in ‘Christmas’ is
syllabified as coda plus onset.
    The link between quality and position exhibited in Bengali, Telugu,
Fula, and Sherpa–a copy vowel inside the cluster and a default vowel
before the cluster–would be most firmly established if we were able to
find that variation in position is accompanied by variation in quality.
Fortunately, such evidence does exist. Ka (1985) and Sy (2013) report the
now-familiar pattern of sonority-driven positional variation in borrowings
       Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 305


from French into Wolof (a Niger-Congo language), with a copy vowel
inserted inside a rising sonority onset and a mid front default vowel before
S-stop onsets. While Ka represents [e] as the uniform prothetic default, Sy
(2013) claims that the prothetic vowel agrees in [ATR] (tongue root
position) with the following vowel; transcriptions in (15b) are from Sy
(2013):

(15)       Wolof borrowings from French (Ka 1985; Ka personal
           communication, Sy 2013)

             Wolof           French
           a. kalas          klas               ‘class’ (‘classe’)
              giri           gri                ‘gray’ (‘gris’)
              silip          slip               ‘slip’ (‘slip’)
              sonob          snob               ‘snob’ (‘snob’)

           b. ‫ܭ‬st‫ݞ‬ti         staty              ‘statue’ (‘statue’)
              ‫ܭ‬sp‫ܧ‬:r         sp‫ܧ‬r               ‘sports’ (‘sport’)
              esteno:        steno              ‘stenographer’ (‘steno’)
              estilo         stilo              ‘pen’ (‘stilo’)

For onsets consisting of sibilant fricatives followed by a nasal or liquid,
Fleischhacker (2005) reports variation in insertion position–and strikingly,
this positional variation is accompanied by variation in vowel quality.
While S-initial clusters may undergo either anaptyxis or prothesis, the
connection between position and quality remains: when the inserted vowel
appears within the cluster, it is a copy of the following vowel, and when it
precedes the cluster, it is the default mid vowel (transcriptions are from
Fleischhacker, who does not distinguish the [ATR] variants):

(16)       Wolof borrowings from French (Fleischhacker 2005)

           a. somokiƾ                  ‘smoking jacket’
              silip                    ‘slip’ (undergarment)

           b. esmok                    ‘smoke’
              eslepnir                 ‘Sleipnir’
                                       (name, elicited by Fleischhacker)

Thus, the same onset cluster may undergo anaptyxis with a copy vowel, or
prothesis with a default vowel. This pattern of variation makes clear the
306                            Chapter Twelve


link between position and quality.
    The Wolof cases, which involve borrowings from French, demonstrate
that the pattern of anaptyctic copy vowel/prothetic default vowel is not
confined to words borrowed from any single language. Additional
evidence of the same doubly-mixed pattern comes from borrowings from
Russian into the Turkic language Uyghur:

(17)     Uyghur borrowings from Russian (Fleischhacker 2005; Hahn
         1991)

           Uyghur          Russian
         a. kulub          klub                 ‘club’

         b. istatistika     statistika          ‘statistics’

Russian borrowings also show a mixed pattern of adaptation in Samoyedic
Uralic languages. In his discussion of consonant clusters in Nenets, Enets,
Nganasan, and Selkup, all of which lack complex onsets, Varnái (2012)
reports that word-initial clusters in Russian borrowings show a variety of
repairs, including consonant deletion or CV metathesis. The most frequent
repair of obstruent-resonant onsets is insertion of a vowel within the
cluster that is “the same as the vowel of the next syllable.” However,
when vowel insertion applies to onsets consisting of a voiceless sibilant
fricative plus a stop, the inserted vowel appears before the cluster, and this
prothetic vowel has a fixed quality, [a] in Nenets and Nganasan and [i] in
Selkup:

(18)     Samoyedic borrowings from Russian (Varnái 2012)

           Samoyedic                 Russian
         a. xaram (Nenets)           gram                 ‘gram’
            xurupa (Nenets)          krupa                ‘cereals’
            torob (Nenets)           drobj                ‘barrel’
            birigadԥ (Nganasan)      brigada              ‘brigade’
            burukԥ‫( ݦ‬Nganasan)       brjuki               ‘trousers’
            kurus (Selkup)           gruz                 ‘cargo’

         b. askola (Nenets)              ‫ݕ‬kola            ‘school’
            askolԥ (Nganasan)            ‫ݕ‬kola            ‘school’
            iskam‫ܭ‬jka (Selkup)           skamejka         ‘bench’
       Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 307


   A partial relationship between vowel quality and position is found in
Farsi, according to Shademan (2002). In the dialect of Farsi discussed by
Shademan, all /s/-stop onsets are repaired via prothesis, while all other
obstruent-resonant onsets are repaired by anaptyxis. While anaptyctic
vowels may be either a copy of the following vowel or a default [e], the
prothetic vowel is always the default [e]:

(19)       Farsi borrowing from English, French (Shademan 2002)

           a. terafik                  ‘traffic’
              pelastik                 ‘plastic’
              korom                    ‘chrome’
              buluz (French)           ‘blouse’

           b. eski                     ‘ski’
              eslav                    ‘Slav’
              estop                    ‘stop’
              esport                   ‘sport’

    Thus, the interaction between position and quality appears across a
range of recipient and source languages, invariably in the same direction:
an anaptyctic copy vowel alongside a prothetic default vowel. The next
section outlines the typological findings.

                       4. Typological generalizations
    The table below summarizes the logical possibilities for insertion site,
where the upper case letters indicate lexical segments. “T”, “R”, and “S”
represent the class of stops, resonants (nasals, liquids, and glides), and
sibilant fricatives, respectively, “V” represents a lexical vowel, and lower
case “v” represents an inserted vowel.
308                              Chapter Twelve


(20) Possible positions for inserted vowel

      Position       anaptyxis       prothesis       Mixed        mixed
                                                    position,     positio,
                                                     type 1        type 2
                        TvRV,         vTRV,       TvRV, vSTV      vTRV,
                        SvTV          vSTV                         SvTV

 Japanese           ¥

 Iraqi Arabic                          ¥
 (NL pattern)

 Cairene                                          ¥
 Arabic

 No language?

Of these four logical possibilities, examples of only three have been
attested (Fleischhacker 2005). In particular, mixed pattern type 1, in
which a vowel is inserted within obstruent-resonant clusters (with the
possible exception of those beginning with sibilant fricatives) but before
S-stop clusters (and possibly some or all S-resonant clusters) are common,
while the reverse pattern is unattested. There is no obvious reason why
the type 1 pattern should emerge among speakers whose native languages
contain no clusters of either type, and whose exposure to the foreign
language includes clusters of both types—on the face of it, the type 2
mixed pattern should be equally likely to emerge.
    Considering only the attested mixed position pattern (mixed position,
type 1), we find four logical possibilities for interaction between insertion
site and vowel quality, schematized in the table below. Here, upper case
“A” represents a lexical vowel, lower case “a” represents a copy vowel,
and lower case “i” a default vowel:
     Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 309


(21) Possible interactions between mixed positions type 1 pattern and
     quality of inserted vowel

                default    mixed quality,    copy           mixed quality,
                quality    type 1            quality        type 2

                TiRA,      TaRA, iSTA        TaRA,          TiRA, aSTA
                iSTA                         aSTA


 Cairene         ¥

 Bengali,                    ¥
 Telugu,
 Fula,
 Wolof,
 Sherpa,
 Uyghur,
 Samoyedic,
 Farsi

 No
 languages?


Only two of the four logically possible interactions appear to be attested:
use of a default vowel in both positions and use of a copy vowel within the
cluster but a default vowel before the cluster. We should note, however,
that at least for some speakers of both Cairene and Makkan Arabic, there
is a tendency to insert a round vowel within obstruent-resonant clusters
when the following vowel is round (Galal 2004; Ahyad 2013), suggesting
that there may not, in fact, be clear cases of pure default systems.
    In §2, we considered several explanations that have been proposed for
the emergence of the apparently unmotivated mixed type 1 pattern and the
absence of the unattested pattern. We are now in a position to connect the
facts of positional variation with the interaction between position and
quality. The generalization that emerges in consideration of mixed quality
systems is that copy vowels are favored when the inserted vowel is
directly followed by a resonant consonant. In fact, the preference for copy
vowels in the obstruent-resonant position is not limited to languages with
positional variation. In the Austronesian language Dehu, onset clusters are
consistently resolved via anaptyxis, but the quality of the inserted vowel
varies according to the composition of the cluster. Tryon (1970: 434)
310                               Chapter Twelve


describes the Dehu pattern, illustrated in (22), as follows:

      “With consonant clusters, CC > CVC. The V tends to harmonize with
      either the preceding or following V, except that sC > siC, regardless of
      surrounding vowels.”

(22)       Dehu borrowings from English (Tryon 1970)

           a. peleit          ‘plate’
              gilis           ‘grease’
              galas           ‘glass’
              balaiket        ‘blanket’
              faraig          ‘franc’
              falawa          ‘bread’ (possibly through Samoan)

           b. sipö            ‘spur’
              sipun           ‘spoon’
              sitima          ‘steamer’

Unfortunately, Tryon provides no examples of cases involving sC onsets
where the second consonant is a resonant. However, the existing data are
consistent with the generalization that copying of vowel features is far
more likely across resonant consonants than across obstruents. 8 In the
following section I consider possible explanations for this generalization.

           5. Explaining the position-quality interaction
    In this section I outline two possible accounts of the widespread
emergence of type 1 mixed systems, in which a copy vowel is used to
repair obstruent-resonant onsets but not S-stop (or in some cases S-C)
onsets: a production-based approach based on the resistance of certain
consonant classes to copy of vowel features, and a perception-based
approach in which copy vowels reflect listeners’ misinterpretation of the
foreign structures. While a full exploration of these approaches is beyond
the scope of this paper, I will briefly sketch the possibilities and their
potential fit with the facts we have uncovered.
    One possible explanation is that the mixed pattern of prothetic
default/anaptyctic copy vowel arises from universal principles disfavoring
copying of vowel features across obstruents, but not across resonant

8
  The one example Tryon provides that involves neither copy nor default vowel
insertion is [݇eri] ‘three’.
     Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 311


consonants. If the failure to copy vowel features across obstruents is
viewed as an emergence of the unmarked effect, we would hope to find an
implicational relationship between copying across obstruents vs. resonant
consonants. A number of researchers have explored the role of consonants
in either facilitating or blocking the copying of vowel features (see, e.g.,
McCarthy 1998; Gafos & Lombardi 1999; Kitto & deLacy 1999; Mahanta
2007), but no clear consensus has emerged on a universal hierarchy of
blocking effects. Obstruents do not uniformly block copying; in
Makassarese native phonology, for example, inserted vowels copy their
features across /s/ (as well as /r/ and /l/, Basri et al. 2012). Nor do resonant
consonants uniformly allow the spreading of vowel features; in a study of
the role of intervening consonants in vowel harmony, Mahanta (2007)
argues that it is actually consonants with higher sonority that are most
likely to interfere with vowel harmony. This is obviously a question that
deserves further study, and a definitive answer lies beyond the scope of
this paper.
    For an alternative explanation of the emergence of copy vowels in the
obstruent-resonant context, we return to Fleischhacker’s discussion of the
perceptual similarity between obstruent-resonant and obstruent-vowel-
resonant structures. Fleischhacker presents a wealth of evidence for the
perceptual similarity of OR and OvR, including a survey of partial puns in
which she finds considerably more pairs like broke-baroque and slammed-
salaamed than pairs like sport-support. While Fleischhacker argues that
loanword adapters accurately perceive the foreign forms, and then adapt
them to the closest possible legal native structure (OvR for obstruent-
resonant onsets), the evidence for the perceptual similarity of OR and OvR
could equally be taken to support an alternative hypothesis: rather than
accurately perceiving OR onsets but adapting them to the perceptually
most similar structure, listeners actually misperceive OR as OvR. This
misperception would be consistent with the findings of Dupoux et al.
(1999) that listeners tend to perceive an illusory vowel in clusters that are
illegal in their native language. If misperception plays a role in the
appearance of loanword vowel insertion, the questions that arise in
conjunction with the typological generalizations outlined in the preceding
section are the following: (1) is there reason to believe that an illusory
vowel might be more likely within an obstruent-resonant onset than within
a fricative-stop onset?; and (2) is there reason to believe that the illusory
vowel within an obstruent-resonant onset might be likely to be perceived
as a copy of a following vowel?
    Fleischhacker’s (2005) findings on near puns and on similarity
judgments speak to the first question, since they suggest that OvR and OR
312                              Chapter Twelve


are more similar than SvT and ST. The inherent difficulty of
discriminating OR and OvR is also supported by the finding of Werker et
al. (1998) that babies prior to age 10 months in an English-speaking
environment do not successfully discriminate pairs like clone-cologne. 9
Given the considerable body of evidence that babies younger than 10
months display sensitivity even to distinctions that are not contrastive in
their native language (e.g.,Werker 1995), this is significant support for the
inherent confusability of (at least) OR and OԥR.
    Support for the susceptibility of OR sequences to being perceived as
containing a vowel comes from Hall’s (2003, 2006) extensive study of
what she terms “intrusive vowels”–elements of the speech signal that are
perceived as vowels but do not appear to add to the syllable count. Hall
argues that listeners may perceive loose coordination between consonantal
gestures as an intervening (intrusive) vowel. She demonstrates that
intrusive vowels are most likely to arise in two contexts: adjacent to
resonant consonants and adjacent to glottal consonants ([h] and glottal
stop). Since none of the source language onsets in our data include a
glottal consonant, the latter context is not relevant for our study. Hall
argues that resonant consonants are more subject to the misinterpretation
that gives rise to a vowel percept than are obstruents, because the
landmarks for the onset and offset of resonant consonants are less clear
than for stops and fricatives (see also, for example, Davidson 2007).
    Thus, a tendency to misinterpret OR onsets as OvR onsets could
plausibly arise from two factors: the tendency to hear illusory vowels
between clusters that are illegal in one’s native language, and the tendency
to interpret loosely coordinated consonantal gestures as separated by an
intervening vowel. The acoustics of the source language might also play a
role, as English speakers, at least, appear to exercise a good deal of
freedom in the timing of both OR and OvR sequences. In a study of the
pronunciation of /l/ in words ORV words like blow and OԥRV words like
below, Huffman (1997) found considerable variability in the timing of the
liquid gestures, with a vowel-detection algorithm finding no vowel in
some below-class tokens and finding evidence of a vowel in some blow-
class tokens. The wide range of acceptable variation in the timing of
consonant-liquid onsets is illustrated by the common pronunciation of
please as bisyllabic (often written as puh-leeze). Thus, it seems quite

9
  Coetzee (2011) found that English speakers tended to perceive an illusory vowel
in word-initial sequences of /s/ followed by an aspirated stop. This effect was
presumably a function of the participants’ knowledge of English, in which stops
following /s/ are never aspirated, and one would not expect to find the same
perceptual pattern among speakers for whom [sTh] is a licit word-initial sequence.
     Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 313


plausible that a listener whose native language does not permit, e.g., word-
initial /pl/ should interpret loosely-coordinated /pl/ as /pvl/.
    However, if we concede the plausibility of the hypothesis that listeners
whose language lacks OR onsets might perceive an illusory vowel in O_R,
we are still left with the question of why the illusory vowel should be
perceived as a copy vowel, identical in some or all features to the next
vowel. On this question, too, Hall’s work provides an explanation. Hall
(2003, 2006) identifies two types of intrusive vowels: reduced (schwa-
like) vowels and contextually determined vowels displaying the features of
a neighboring vowel or consonant. Because illusory vowels seem to
correspond to some member of the borrowing language’s vowel inventory
(Dupoux et al. 1999), we would not expect listeners whose phoneme
inventory does not contain schwa to perceive the loose transition between
obstruent and resonant as a schwa (and indeed, the lack of schwa appears
to be a characteristic of the languages discussed above which display the
anaptyctic copy/prothetic default pattern). In the absence of schwa,
perception of the illusory vowel in the O_R context as a copy vowel has a
reasonable explanation, arising from two interacting factors. First, as a
reviewer pointed out, the overlapping vowel gesture may, in Hall’s words,
“color the acoustic release” of the initial obstruent (Hall 2006: 412).
Second, as we have seen, there appears, at least in English, to be some
freedom in the timing of the resonant gestures in OR clusters, and a delay
in the resonant gesture may lead to a period in which the vocalic gestures
are perceptible both before and after the resonant. It is precisely such a
delay, according to Steriade (1990), that gave rise to the historical change
called Dorsey’s Law. Dorsey’s Law describes the emergence of a copy
vowel between sequences of voiceless obstruent followed by resonant
consonant in Winnebago (e.g., historically prior /pra/ became /para/).
While these copy vowels are perceived as clearly present, they do not
participate in the stress system in the same way as do other vowels, as is
characteristic of intrusive vowels. Steriade (1990) has analyzed the
Dorsey’s Law change as a result of changes in the timing of the
consonantal and vocalic gestures: “a delay in the onset of the liquid can
create a sequence in which the vowel gesture begins to “show” between
the consonant gestures.” Steriade schematizes the timing adjustment that
gave rise to the change from /pra/ to /para/ as follows:
314                             Chapter Twelve


(23)         Dorsey’s Law (Steriade 1990)

             Tiers                               Gestures

       tongue body        [_________________a________________]

       tongue tip         [____r____]       [_____r____]

       lip                [____p______]

    Thus, the appearance of a copy vowel in the onset-resonant context is
consistent with an account in which these vowels arise from listeners’
misperceptions of the foreign sequences. For example, we can envision the
development of Farsi [korom] 'chrome' as follows: the gestures involved in
the first three segments of the source [krom] will normally overlap to
some extent, and a slight delay in the liquid gestures relative to the vowel
might lead to sufficient liquid-vowel overlap in that a listener could
plausibly interpret the intended target as [korom]. The connection between
preferred position and preferred quality of inserted vowels in rising
sonority onsets is thus a function of the possibility of overlap in the
production of the resonant and vowel gestures. In contrast, we would not
expect the same sort of misperception to arise with obstruent-obstruent
onsets such as /s/-stop, because obstruents provide much clearer
landmarks indicating the onset and offset of their gestural targets, making
their sequencing much more difficult to misinterpret (Davidson 2007).
    To summarize, then, I suggest that the appearance of copy vowels in
obstruent-resonant but not in obstruent-obstruent onsets in loanword
adaptation is consistent with what we know about the robustness of the
acoustic cues associated with the two onset types. Obstruent-resonant
onsets give less clearly defined cues to the relative timing of the CCV
gestures, opening the possibility that listeners unaccustomed to
distinguishing OR and OvR will misinterpret the former as the latter. In
contrast, obstruent-obstruent onsets are more difficult to misinterpret as
containing a vowel. What remains to be explained, however, is the
appearance of default vowels in mixed systems. One possible explanation
is that these default vowels are true phonologically inserted vowels,
arising not from misperception but from a repair imposed in the
production grammar.
     Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 315


                             6. Conclusion
    Investigation of the adaptation of word-initial biconsonantal clusters
across a number of source and recipient languages has provided evidence
for the emergence of a fairly common pattern in which the position and the
quality of the vowel differ according to the class of consonants making up
the cluster. In many languages, the vowel inserted inside a stop-resonant
cluster constitutes a copy of some or all of the following vowel’s features.
In contrast, the vowel inserted before a sibilant-stop cluster represents an
invariant default. Clusters consisting of a sibilant fricative followed by a
resonant show variation, patterning in some cases with stop-resonant and
in others with /s/-stop onsets. The emergence of this systematic pattern is
intriguing, since neither the source nor the recipient languages present any
obvious motivation for distinguishing different cluster types, since both
rising and falling sonority onsets are present in the source language and
absent in the recipient language. The emergence of only a subset of the
logically possible position-quality interactions is surely telling us
something significant about human linguistic behavior. I have outlined
two possible hypotheses concerning the preference for anaptyctic copy
vowels in OR clusters and prothetic default vowels in S-stop clusters. The
first approach ascribes the preference for copy vowels in OR but not S-
stop to a universal dispreference for spreading vowel features across
obstruents. The second analyzes copy vowels within obstruent-resonant
clusters as a result of listeners’ misinterpretation of the acoustics of the
foreign language; specifically, to gestural overlap between the resonant
and the following vowel, which encourages the perception of a copy
vowel preceding the resonant. In contrast, I suggest that obstruent-
obstruent sequences are much less subject to misinterpretation, so the
default vowels associated with these onsets are more likely the result of
true vowel insertion in the production grammar. These hypotheses await
careful experimental investigation.

                               References
Ahyad, H. (2013) The quality of the epenthetic vowel in Makkan Arabic.
   Unpublished manuscript, Stony Brook University.
Bardakjian, K. and R. Thomson (1977) A Textbook of Modern Western
   Armenian. Delmar, NJ: Caravan Books.
Basri, H., E. Broselow and D. Finer (2012) The end of the word in
   Makassar languages. In T. Borowsky et al. (eds.), Prosody Matters:
   Essays in Honor of Lisa Selkirk, 111-147. London: Equinox Publishing
316                          Chapter Twelve


    Ltd.
Brasington, R. (1981) Epenthesis and deletion in loan phonology. Work in
    Progress 3, Reading University Phonetics Lab, 97-103.
Broselow, E. (1983) Nonobvious transfer: On predicting epenthesis errors.
    In L. Selinker and S. Gass (eds.), Language Transfer in Language
    Learning, 269-280. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. Reprinted in G.
    Ioup and S. Weinberger (eds.), 1987, Interlanguage Phonology, 292-
    304. Cambridge, MA: Newbury House.
—. (1992a) Transfer and universals in second language epenthesis. In S.
    Gass and L. Selinker (eds.), Language Transfer in Language Learning
    (Revised edition), 71-86. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
—. (1992b) The structure of fricative-stop onsets. Unpublished
    manuscript, Stony Brook University.
—. (2009) Stress adaptation in loanword phonology: Perception and
    learnability. In P. Boersma and S. Hamann (eds.), Phonology in
    Perception, 191-234. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Browman, C. and L. Goldstein (1986) Towards an articulatory phonology.
    Phonology Yearbook 3: 219-252.
Coetzee, A. (2011) Syllables in speech processing: Evidence from
    perceptual epenthesis. In C. Cairns and E. Raimy (eds.), Handbook of
    the Syllable, 295-328. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
Davidson, L. (2007) The relationship between the perception of non-native
    phonotactics and loanword adaptation. Phonology 24(2): 261-286.
Davidson, L. and J. Shaw (2012) Sources of illusion in consonant cluster
    perception. Journal of Phonetics 40(2): 234-248.
Dupoux, E., Y. Hirose, K. Kakehi, C. Pallier and J. Mehler (1999)
    Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: A perceptual illusion? Journal of
    Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 25(6):
    1568-1578.
Fleischhacker, H. (2001) Cluster-dependent epenthesis asymmetries. In A.
    Albright and T. Co (eds.), Papers in Phonology 5, UCLA Working
    Papers in Linguistics, 71-116.
—. (2005) Similarity in phonology: Evidence from reduplication and loan
    adaptation. Ph.D. dissertation, UCLA.
Gafos, A. and L. Lombardi (1999) Consonant transparency and vowel
    echo. NELS 29: 81-95.
Galal, M. (2004) An OT approach to loanword adaptation in Cairene
    Arabic. Kansas Working Papers in Linguistics 27: 1-20.
Gouskova, M. (2002) Falling sonority onsets, loanwords, and syllable
    contact. CLS 37: 175-186.
Hahn, R. (1991) Spoken Uyghur. London and Seattle: University of
    Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 317


    Washington Press.
Hall, N. (2003) Gestures and segments: Vowel intrusion as overlap. Ph.D.
    dissertation, University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
—. (2006) Cross-linguistic patterns of vowel intrusion. Phonology 23:
    387-430.
—. (2011) Vowel epenthesis. In M. van Oostendorp et al. (eds.), The
    Blackwell Companion to Phonology, 1576-1596. Malden, MA &
    Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Hinds, M. and E. Badawy (1986) A Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic. Beirut:
    Libraire du Liban.
Huffman, M. (1997) Phonetic variation in intervocalic onset /l/’s in
    English. Journal of Phonetics 25: 115-141.
Ka, O. (1985) Syllable structure and suffixation in Wolof. Studies in the
    Linguistic Sciences 15: 61-90.
Kang, Y. (2011) Loanword phonology. In M. van Oostendorp et al. (eds.),
    The Blackwell Companion to Phonology, 2258-2281. Malden, MA &
    Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Kitto, C. and P. deLacy (1999) Correspondence and epenthetic quality. In
    C. Kitto and C. Smallwood (eds.), Proceedings of AFLA (Austronesian
    Formal Linguistics Association) VI. Toronto: Toronto Working Papers
    in Linguistics, 181-200.
Mahanta, S. (2007) Directionality and Locality in Vowel Harmony.
    Utrecht University: LOT.
Mahato, P. (1974) A Linguistic Study of English Loan-words in Rabindra
    Literature. Calcutta: A. K. Das.
McCarthy, J. (1998) Morpheme structure constraints and paradigm
    occultation. CLS 32, vol. II: 123-150.
McCarthy, J. and A. Prince (1994) The emergence of the unmarked:
    Optimality in prosodic morphology. NELS 24: 333-379.
Moreton, E. (2008) Analytic bias and phonological typology. Phonology
    25(1): 83-127.
Paradis, C. and D. LaCharité (1997) Preservation and minimality in
    loanword adaptation. Journal of Linguistics 33: 379-430.
Parker, S. (2008) Sound level protrusions as physical correlates of
    sonority. Journal of Phonetics 36: 55-90.
Peperkamp, S. (2005) A psycholinguistic study of loanword adaptation.
    Proceedings of the Annual Meeting, Berkeley Linguistics Society 30:
    341-352.
Rao, U. G. (1986) Telugu syllable structure. Unpublished manuscript.
    Stony Brook University.
Rose, Y. and K. Demuth (2006) Vowel epenthesis in loanword adaptation:
318                          Chapter Twelve


   Representational and phonetic considerations. Lingua 116: 1112-1139.
Samarajiwa, C. and R. M. Abeysekera (1964) Some pronunciation
   difficulties of Sinhalese learners of English as a foreign language.
   Language Learning 14: 45-50.
Selkirk, L. (1982) The syllable. In H. van der Hulst and N. Smith (eds.),
   The Structure of Phonological Representations, Part II, 337-383.
   Dordrecht: Foris.
Shademan, S. (2002) Epenthetic vowel harmony in Farsi. Ph.D.
   dissertation, University of California at Los Angeles.
Sharma, D. D. (1980) A Study of Loan Words in Central Pahari.
   Chandigarh: Panjab University.
Shaw, J. and L. Davidson (2011) Perceptual similarity in input-output
   mappings: A computational/experimental study of non-native speech
   production. Lingua 121(8): 1344-1358.
Sherpa, G. (2012) Sherpa syllable structure and adaptation of English
   loanwords. Unpublished manuscript, Stony Brook University.
Singh, R. (1985) Prosodic adaptation in interphonology. Lingua 67: 269-
   282.
Steriade, D. (1990) Gestures and autosegments: Comments on Browman’s
   and Goldstein’s paper. In J. Kingston and M. Beckman (eds.), Papers
   in Laboratory Phonology II: Between the Grammar and Physics of
   Speech, 382-397. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Steriade, D. (2001) The phonology of perceptibility effects: The P-map
   and its consequences for constraint organization. Manuscript, UCLA.
Sy, M. (2013) Vowel harmony in Wolof loanwords. Studies in African
   Linguistics, Supplement 11.
Tryon, D. T. (1970) Loanwords in Dehu pre-1920. In S. Wurm and D.
   Laycock (eds.), Pacific Linguistic Studies in Honor of Arthur Capell,
   Pacific Linguistics, Series C, No. 13: 429-438. Canberra: Australian
   National University.
Uffmann, C. (2006) Epenthetic vowel quality in loanwords: Empirical and
   formal issues. Lingua 116: 1079-1111.
—. (2007) Vowel Epenthesis in Loanword Phonology. Tübingen, Max
   Neimeyer Verlag.
Varnái, Z. (2012) Consonant clusters in four Samoyedic languages. In P.
   Hoole et al. (eds.), Consonant Clusters and Structural Complexity,
   119-156. Boston/Berlin: de Gruyter.
Werker, J. (1995) Exploring developmental changes in cross-language
   speech perception. In L. R. Gleitman and M. Liberman (eds.), An
   Invitation to Cognitive Science: Language, 87-106. Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press.
    Typology of Position-Quality Interactions in Loanword Vowel Insertion 319


Werker, J., J. Pegg, R. Shi and C. Stager (1998) Updates on becoming a
   native listener. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 103(5):
   2932-2932.
Yip, M. (1993) Cantonese loanword phonology and Optimality Theory.
   Journal of East Asian Linguistics 2: 261-292.
Young-Scholten, M. and J. Archibald (2000) Second language syllable
   structure. In J. Archibald (ed.), Second Language Acquisition and
   Linguistic Theory, 64-101. Oxford: Blackwell.
Zuraw, K. (2007) The role of phonetic knowledge in phonological
   patterning: Corpus and survey evidence from Tagalog. Language 83:
   277-316.
