KANSAS WORKING PAPERS
         IN
      LINGUISTICS
                             edited by

                       Osama Abdel-Ghafer
                  Brad Montgomery-Anderson
                 Maria del Carmen Parafita Couto




                         Volume 27
                           2004




         Partial funding for this journal is provided by the
 Graduate and Professional Association of the University of Kansas.




                         ISSN 1043-3805


            ©Linguistics Graduate Student Association
                  University of Kansas, 2004




         Cover Design by Nathan Poell and Stacey Stowers
AN OT APPROACH TO LOANWORD ADAPTATION IN CAIRENE
                  ARABIC



                          Mohamed Galal
                      The University of Kansas

         Abstract: Cairene Arabic (CA) elects epenthesis as a strategy for
         adapting loanwords. This paper tackles the reasons why this occurs
         as well as the different aspects of vowel epenthesis within the
         framework of Optimality Theory (OT)(McCarthy and Prince,
         1993;Prince and Smolensky, 1993) and the relevant literature. This
         research specifically focuses on loanwords introduced into CA
         from English. It is shown that OT neatly accounts for vowel
         epenthesis in loanwords in CA, proving that the attested optimal
         forms are the result of the conflict between faithfulness and
         markedness. It is also proven that loanwords are modified
         according to the productive phonological processes of CA i.e. LI
         constraints. The special case of s+obstruent blocking effect is
         discussed universally and with special reference to CA.

  1 Introduction
       There has always been an interest in the different phonological processes
  involved in adapting loanwords to transform into well-formed words in the
  borrowing language. Deletion, epenthesis and suprasegemental changes are
  among the processes that occur in this phonological phenomenon. These
  strategies were called repairs (Paradis and La Charite 1997) due to their
  transforming effects. Languages opt for one repair strategy or another depending
  on various phonological reasons. Cairene Arabic (CA) elects epenthesis as a
  strategy for adapting loanwords. The reasons why this occurs and the different
  aspects of epenthesis as a loanword repair strategy are dealt with in this paper
  within the framework of Optimality Theory (OT) initiated by McCarthy and
  Prince (1993) and Prince and Smolensky (1993). Loanwords introduced into
  Arabic from English are the focus of the research.

      This paper accounts, within the framework of OT, for the adaptation of
  loanwords introduced into Cairene Arabic (CA) from English in terms of vowel
  epenthesis. In particular, three main points are analyzed.
  (1)         a. The constraints responsible for vowel epenthesis in general, i.e.
             epenthesis vs. deletion as a strategy opted for by CA;
             b. The determinants of the position of epenthetic vowel in terms of OT
             constraints;
2




           c. The factors Accounting for the quality of the epenthetic vowels,
              particularly why some vowels are selected for the purpose of
              epenthesis rather than others.

          This work shows that OT neatly accounts for loanword adaptation strategies
    in terms of vowel epenthesis employed by CA, proving that the attested optimal
    forms are the result of this conflict between faithfulness and maikedness, thus
    lending further evidence to the validity of the universality of this dichotomy
    proposed by the theory. The fact that all constraints interact by ranking in one
    way or another is an indication of the capacity of the theory to achieve functional
    unity. One more reason to motivate this study is that, to my knowledge, no
    previous studies have been done on loanword adaptation in Cairene Arabic (CA).

         The organization of the paper goes as follows. Two main sections are
    provided: a data section and an analysis section. The data section presents the
    actual items under study, describes them and abstracts some generalizations. The
    analysis section analyzes the data and motivates the constraints for vocalic
    epenthesis in terms of three main points mentioned above.

    2 Data. Description and Generalization

         The data under study are all from CA (Afro-Asiatic, Semitic). Most of the
    items are collected from Hinds and Badawy (1986). However, being involved in
    the process of ESL teaching I added items (f) and (i) in data (2) from my personal
    communication with native speakers.
    (2)    Different positions of the epenthetic vowel

               Arabic             English
               a.firizar          freezer
               b.biristul         bristol
               c.birinter         printer
               d.kirimbilin       Crimplene
               e.Pistiryu         stereo
               f.Pisbiit/         speech
               g.?isbireeh        spray
               h. bankinut        banknote
               i.Jarkiskiin       shark skin
                                  cloth
               j.bustiman         postman
                                                                                              3




(3)     Variation in the quality of epenthetic vowel

            Arabic               English
            a.burujiktur         projector
            b.rulurusint         florescent
            c.furuut             fruit
            d.guruub             group
            eJcaJatT             clutch
            f.fiW                flash
            g.kitesh             clash
            h.?istaf             staff
            i.?istuk             stock
            j.Jistub             stop


   The data presented are adapted forms of originally English words used in the
common speech of the population of Cairo and its adjacent provinces.

     Data (2) includes all cases that show different positions of the epenthetic
vowel. In (a-d), epenthetic [i] occurs cluster internally (between [fj and [r] in (a),
[b] and [r] in (b-c), [k] and[r] in 4(d)). In (e-g) the epenthetic vowel takes another
position and occurs cluster externally (before [st] in (e), and before [sb] in (f-h)).
So, there are two main positions for the epenthetic vowel, either cluster internally
or cluster externally. The last three items, (h-j), are cases where CCC cluster
occurs; the position of the epenthetic vowel is always after the second consonant
of the cluster: (..nkin..,.. rkis..,..stim.. in bankinut, Jarkiskiin, bustiman
respectively)

      Data (3) mainly includes the items that show variation in the quality of
epenthetic vowel. So, in (a-d) the epenthetic vowel is [u]; in (e) it is [a] and in (f-
j), it is [i]. It is clear from the data in this set that there is a full correspondence in
quality between the epenthetic vowel (in bold) and the immediately following
vowel in (a-d) (the epenthetic vowel [u] is a copy of the immediately following
vowel). In items (f-j) such correspondence is only partial; the case does not
involve copying, unlike (a-d), though there are similarities between both in terms
of certain phonological dimensions. (This will be explained in the analysis part).

    If we may make generalization here it is possible to tentatively say that
epenthesis could be the result of phonotactic constraints ranked differently in CA
and English. The rules of CA in (4) would help us figure out why epenthesis
occurs:

(4)     a. No word initial clusters allowed
4




           b. A maximum of two consonants may occur in word final position.
           c. A maximum of two consonants may occur word medially
           d. No initial vowels (except in morphophonemic alternation)
           e. The canonical syllable type is CV(C).

        In the analysis part we will see that loan words get adapted to fit the
    phonotactics of syllable structure in CA and that epenthesis is introduced in the
    language to satisfy constraints on phonotactics and syllable structure in the
    borrowing language.

         Given the data at hand it could be roughly said that CA seems to show a
    preference for epenthesis over deletion, so it is predicted that: MAX » DEP'. We
    can read from the data that complexity of the onset is strictly forbidden so that *
    COMPLEX°NS is predicted to be at play. The data also has a preference for
    ONSET. There has to be an onset; where this does not exist, the epenthetic glottal
    stop [?] is provided" .The glottal stop saves the ONSET constraint in CA. These
    are just some preliminary observations about the data .The constraints will be
    explained and defined and their interactions will be illustrated in the following
    analysis section.

    3 An OT Analysis

          In this part, I will show how constraints work and interact in order to account
    for the various facts about epenthesis as a strategy in loanword adaptation. Three
    main issues will be dealt with here: constraints for vowel epenthesis vs. deletion
    as a strategy opted for by CA; different positions of the epenthetic vowels; the
    determinants of the quality of epenthetic vowel. Before starting our analysis a
    note about the choice of input items has to be taken into consideration. I devote
    the following sub-section to discussing this issue.

     Input
         It is taken for granted that both Arabic and English have their own sound
    inventories, as evident from tables 1- 4. It is normal in the process of loanword
    adaptation involved here to see a mapping of English sounds into their
    counterparts in Arabic. The vowel inventory in CA, according to Gary and Gamal
    El-din (1982), includes:
    (5)     a. short vowels: /i/, high front; /u/ high back rounded; Id
                   lowback.unrounded
            b. long vowels (with short counterparts):/!: /, /u: /, k: I.
            c. long vowels (without short counterparts):/e:/front, -high, -low; /o:/back
                  round, -high, -low.
                                                                                                                                                                                    5




As for consonants, all English consonant sounds are included in the Arabic
inventory except /p/ sound which has only a voiced counterpart in Arabic/b/ (See
tables I-IV for comparison). However if there is a mismatch between English and
Arabic sounds, the closest sound in the borrowing language is picked out. The
word [?istub] (borrowed from English "stop") exemplifies this. The fact that
Arabic lacks the sound /t> /(assuming that CA got this loanword in its British
English pronunciation) the phonological system of Arabic picks out /u/ as the
closest available alternative sound in the inventory in terms of shortness and
roundness. Because Arabic has no /p/ the available alternative is Ihl. This process
works systematically for the loanwords. The scope of this study goes beyond this
one -to- one mapping of sounds between the loaning language and the borrowing
one. The study will be limited to vowel epenthesis as a strategy for repairing the
loaned words tofitthe constraints of CA. I will take the words nativized before
epenthesis occurs to be the input, though it is my belief that sound mutation and
epenthesis occur simultaneously. Based on the previously mentioned example,
/stub/ will be taken to be the input for [?istub].

            Place-                                                Dental




                                                                                                                                                     Pharyngeal
                                                  Interdental




Manner




                                                                                                                                                                          Glottal
                                                                                               alveolar



                                                                  Plain       Emphatic


                                                                                                                                      Uvular
I
                                                                                                          Palatal
                        Labial




                                            .2"                                                                         Velar
                                                                                               Post-




                                            3'
Plosive                                                           t d         T D                                       k                                                 ?
                                                                                                                                      q
                        b                                                                                               g
                                                                                                                        X                            h                    h
Fricative
                        f
                                                  e               s z         S z              ;     j
                                                                                                                        Y

(Central)
approximant             w                                                                      r          j
(Lateral)                                                            1
approximant
Nasal                            m
                                                                                               n
    Table I Consonant inventory of CA based on (Gary and Gamal -El-din, 1982)

              Place-
                                                                                    Alveolar
                                                    Labiodental




Manner
1
                                 Bilabial




                                                                                                                            Palato-

                                                                                                                                           Palatal
                                                                     Dental




                                                                                                                                                                  Velar




Plosive                      P              b                                       t                               d                                             k g
Fricative                                          f v              e          a s                                  z       / 5
(Central) approximant                       (w)                                                                     r                                         j           w
(Lateral) approximant                                                                                               1
Nasal                                       m                                                                       n                                                      !)
                                                                                                                                                     y
            Table II Consonant inventory of English (Ladefoged, 2001)
6




            Front            Central                                         Back
                                                    Rounded                   Unrounded

            Tense    lax     Tense     lax          Tense        lax          Tense       lax
    High    i,ii                                    u, uu
    Mid     ee                                      00
    Low                                                      a m , aa
     Table III Vowel inventory of Arabic based on (Gary and Gamal -El-din, 1982)


             Front             Central                                          Back
                                                                 Rounded              Unrounded
             Tense     lax     Tense         lax         Tense         lax       Tense     lax
     High i            I                                 u             u
     Mid               E        3, ?         8, »        D                                      A
     Low               ffi                                             0              Q


    Table IV Vowel inventory of English (AME, BRE) based on (Roca and Johnson,
    1999)

    Constraints for the Strategy of Vowel Epenthesis vs. Deletion
         First and foremost, since CA doesn't allow a CC cluster to occur syllable
    initially we need a constraint that disallows clustering syllable initially. This
    constraint is:

    (6)     *COMPLEX 0NS : complex onsets are not allowed.

    Note here that the main strategy applied by CA is to epenthesize using a vowel to
    break the complex onset in one of the two following ways. Either to epenthesize
    before the cluster pushing it to a medial position, e.g. Pistiryu, Pisbireeh, Pistub.
    Or alternatively epenthesis occurs internally by breaking up the cluster, e.g.
    firiizar, fulurusint, fila/. Both strategies involve one main goal, which is to avoid
    complex onset. However, if this is the only goal, the epenthesis of vowel is
    enough to satisfy it. The fact that glottal stop will have to be further epenthesized
    shows that a syllable starting with V is not allowed in CA. CA does not allow
    vowels to occur syllable initially. The constraint required is:

    (7)    ONS: Syllables must have onsets.

    Since both *COMPLEX 0NS and ONS are extremely crucial for the syllable
    structure of CA syllable, I'd suggest they must be equally ranked. ONS is always
    in conflict with another constraint that requires all underlying material to be filled,
    in the sense that it disallows the addition of any epenthetic segments. This
                                                                                       7




constraint is DEP-IO, having the effect of blocking epenthesis. This constraint is
defined as:

(8)    DEP-IO : Output segments must have input correspondents (No
epenthesis)
                                                        (McCarthy APrince, 1995)
Since CA prefers providing onsets rather than militating against epenthesis, ONS
must dominate DEP-IO: O N S » DEP-IO. This ranking is necessary since
onsetless forms are not attested in the language, hence epenthesis normally
occurs. The fact that CA assumingly has two strategies available to observe the
constraints ONS and 'COMPLEX             , either to epenthesize or to delete and it
opts for epenthesis means that deletion ranks higher in the language than
epenthesis. The constraint militating against deletion is MAX-IO: Input segments
must have output correspondents (McCarthy &Prince, 1995).
This means MAX-IO» DEP-IO. Since no violation of MAX-IO is allowed, it
should rank as high as "COMPLEX 0NS and ONS. The ranking, so far, should go
as:

(9)     'COMPLEX UNi, ONS, MAX-IO » DEP-IO
This is evidenced by the tableau in (10).

        stub    ONS ; 'COMPLEX UNi j MAX-IO DEP-IO
                                            • ,
     a-^Pis-tub
     b- is.tub  *! ;               i        *
                    ;
     c- stub        , *l           ;


However, words with medial cluster pose a problem for this ranking; it seems we
are in need of one more constraint (or expand one of the current constraints to
disallow this structure). Let's take, for example, the word banktnut 'banknote'.
The previous constraints would predict that ban.ki.nut and banknut are both
grammatical forms, contrary to facts in the language according to which only the
former is attested .The situation is represented by the following tableau.

    banknut      ONS i 'COMPLEX UN5 i MAX-IO DEP-IO
   a- ban.ki.nut                             *
                                                         *
   b- bank.nut

The fact that (b) in (11) has a complex coda does not exclude it , since it is
perfectly possible for the language to have complex codas. What, then, would
invalidate the form (b)? As pointed out in the generalization section, the cluster
CCC is not allowed in CA even if the cluster syllabifies into separate syllables.
So, we either need a new constraint that disallows CCC cluster or to stretch the
already-in-use constraint 'COMPLEX so that it would go beyond disallowing
complex onset to disallow CCC structure anywhere whether on the word level or
phrase level. For the sake of economy and to avoid redundancy, I will opt for the
latter option and redefine * COMPLEX as follows:
 (12) Complex onsets and CCC clusters are not allowed.IT

From now on, * COMPLEX acts as a cover constraint for complex onsets and
CCC clusters. This will militate against (b) in favor of (a) as illustrated by the
tableau in (13).


        bank.nut        ONS i 'COMPLEX • MAX-IO DEP-IO
       " a - ban.ki.nut                                    : *   : •




                            i *!       i        • i ' ,

       b- bank.nut


The ranking for this part, then, is:
(14) 'COMPLEX, ONS, MAX-IO » DEP-IO

Different Positions of Enenthesis within the Cluster

       CCC Cluster: Some important patterns are worth considering here. CA
allows a maximum of two-consonant clusters to occur word-medially, where the
first of the two consonants closes one syllable and the second releases the second.
However CCC cluster is not allowed in CA. There are two logical solutions to
avoid the occurrence of this complex cluster: either CVC.C where a vowel is
epenthesized following the first C; or, alternatively C.CVC. What would
determine the position of the epenthetic vowel? The attested form in the language
uses the latter pattern. Thus, it looks like the pattern in the language is to align
syllables as close as possible to the right edge of the prosodic word. This
constraint is ALIGN- a:

(15)      Align (o, R, PrWd, R) (Mester and Padget, 1993)
          Align right edge of every a with R edge of some prosodic word.
This constraint is in conformity with the Generalized Alignment adopted by
McCarthy and Prince (1993). The constraint in (15) handles the placement of the
epenthetic vowel after the second of three consonants, thus bringing the syllable
edge closer to alignment with the right edge of prosodic word.
(16)   bank.nut         ONS •COMPLEX MAX-IO DEP-IO ALIGN-o
                                                                       a I a2 o3
       •^a-banldnut                                         *           -, wi, uuu
                                                            *          -, uu, uuuu!
       b- ba.nik.nut

Since ALIGN - a is a gradient constraint; it is always violated and must rank with
the sub-ranked DEP-IO. In (16), the decisive element in making (a) the optimal
form is the alignment constraint. WhileCT3in (b) is four moras away from the
right edge, its counterpart in (a) is only three moras and, so, it wins. Remember
that since the alignment is to the right edge, a 1 is the rightmost. Ranking so far
goes as:

(17)       •COMPLEX, ONS, MAX-IO,» DEP-IO, ALIGN- o

     Before we bring this subsection to a close, a little excuesion is in place here.
There could be some similarity between ALIGN- a and the constraint
CONTIGUITY (which will be introduced and defined in subsection (3.3.2)) in
their ultimate effect. However, CONTIGUITY is basically intended to keep
elements adjacent in the input also adjacent in the output. If we use
CONTIGUITY instead of ALIGN- o in tableau (16), we would not be able to
account for why candidate (a) is the optimal. Both candidate (a) and (b) would
incur the same violation of CONTIGUITY. See (3.3.2) for more details.

      A final, and perhaps necessary, note here is that counting by syllables rather
than moras would not show why (a) wins in (16) since both candidates (a and b)
have the same number of syllables but different number of moras. In the
following sub-section I discuss the rising and falling sonority clusters.

      Rising and Falling Sonority Clusters: In the case of a falling sonority cluster
such as [s+obstruent], epenthesis occurs before the cluster; in the case of such
rising sonority clusters as [fr], epenthesis occurs internally between [fj and [r].
How to account for this? In fact, the split epenthesis pattern is pervasive in many
unrelated languages, from Hindi to Wolof. In rising sonority clusters, a vowel is
inserted between the two consonants of the onset as in (18)

(18)       Rising sonority: internal epenthesis

Hindi                  firut                           'fruit'
Bengali                gelaf                           'glass'
Central Pahari         silet                           'slate'
Sinhalese              tiyage                          tyage 'gift' (Sanskrit)
Wolof                  kalas                           'class'
10




     In falling sonority clusters, most notably s-obstruent clusters, the vowel is inserted
     before the cluster, as shown in (19).

     (19)       Falling or flat sonority: edge epenthesis

     Hindi                    iskul                         'school'
     Bengali                  ifkul                         'school'
     Central Pahari           ispiit/                       'speech'
     Sinhalese                istri                           stri 'woman'(Sanskrit)
     Wolof                    estati                        'statue'

     Broselow (1983, 1992) is of the view that there is something special about s-
     obstruent clusters that makes them so distinct from other clusters, namely their
     structure. S-obstruent clusters are complex segments and so too hard to be broken
     up by epenthesis. In fact she argues that s-stop clusters are exceptional, they do
     not permit cluster internal epenthesis in CA. This exceptionality was ascribed to
     two main reasons; one is related to interference from the morphology of CA and
     the other to some universal complexity of s-obstruent. The verbal prefix -ista
     (which has the meanings of 'want', 'claim' among others) is prevalent in the
     morphology of CA as exemplified by the words in (20):

     (20)       ?ista?zin :    'he asked to be excused.'
                ?ista?sid :     'he claimed to be courageous.'
                ?istafham:       'he wanted to understand.'
                Pistahbil:       'he claimed to be an idiot.'

     So, the fact that epenthesis occurs cluster -externally, rather than cluster-
     internally, in this case, could be ascribed to interference from first language, CA.
     In other words the speakers associate the LI s+t with the L2 s+t. She also claims
     that, by analogy, all other s-stop clusters follow suit (s+p, s+k etc.).
     Broselow also states that s-stop clusters are actually exceptional in English as
     well. They are the only syllable -initial clusters which violate the principle that
     segments within the syllable tend to be arranged in a sonority sequence. Segments
     rise in sonority as they approach the nucleus and they fall towards the syllable
     margin according to the following sonority scale:

     (21)          stops-fricatives-nasals-liquids-glides-vowels
                  least sonorous                   most-sonorous

     s-stop clusters are not only exceptional in that .They are the only clusters in
     English that may be followed by a third consonant and the only two-consonant
     clusters that may have an obstruent as their second member. Consider (22):
                                                                                        11




(22)     a.s-stop                                      b. other clusters
         spr, spl, spy: spring, splash, spew            *blw
         substring                                     *sly
         skr, ski,sky,skw:scream,sclerosis,skewer,     *psm
         square, etc.
                                                              Broselow (1983:278)
s+obstruent is not only exceptional in CA and English but also, according to some
references quoted in Broselow, in Sinhalese, Turkish, Persian, and Hindi. Thus,
the exceptionality of s+obstruent is pretty universal. It is claimed that all
languages adopt this representation and even impose it on loanwords. Speakers of
CVC languages (as those mentioned above) must be aware of this difference in
the phonological representations, and respect it in their repair strategies.

     In my view, the main weakness about s-obstruent account given by Broselow
is that she does not explain any phonological or phonetic reasons as to what
causes this structure to be exceptional. Moreover, according to her data of errors
by L2 Iraqi speakers of English, the universality of particularly placing the
epenthetic vowel cluster -externally is not absolute:
 (23) Errors by L2 Iraqi speakers of English:

         [sitrit]    'street'
         [siblaj]    'splash'
         [sikwer]    'square'

So, although Broselow reports the situation quite well she does not offer an
adequate explanation. I take a more plausible solution by Gouskova (2002).
Gouskova's analysis goes along the following lines. She is of the opinion that an
explanation of S-obstruent resistance to epenthesis shouldn't be sought in their
structure. The explanation lies in such sonority sequencing constraints as
SYLLABLE CONTACT that treats s-obstruent clusters differently from obstruent-
sonorant clusters ([st..] vs [fr..], for example). SYLLABLE CONTACT is defined as:

(24) Sonority must not rise across a syllable boundary.
   (Davis 1998, Hooper 1976, Murray and Vennemann 1983, Vennemann 1988).

SYLLABLE CONTACT constraint determines the site of epenthesis, when no
intervention occurs by other constraints, either because SYLLABLE CONTACT is
high-ranked or because its effects surface in the 'Emergence of the Unmarked'
schema (McCarthy and Prince 1994). She rightly explains that in many languages
epenthesis is driven by 'COMPLEX, while SYLLABLE CONTACT dictates the best
site. The vowel is inserted into the position that yields the optimal sequence of
consonants, that is, one with falling sonority. She also makes the prediction that in
all of the languages with the split pattern of epenthesis, 'COMPLEX must dominate
DEP to cause epenthesis in clusters. The analysis presented seems to be borne out
12




     in CA .Her predictions hold true. In CA, * Complex dominates DEP as we see
     from the tableau in (25)


     (25)     /klatf/  •Complex DEP
            a- klatf   *!
            b-^ka.Iatf          f.--

     The vowel is inserted at the edge unless the CC sequence has rising sonority
     (•aklatj). It's clear that, in the tableau above, it is the constraint SYLLABLE
     CONTACT that drives a vowel inside the cluster (ka.latf). This is always the case
     in onset clusters that have the rising sonority and are broken up by internal
     epenthesis.

     (26) /klatf/       •COMPLEX i SYLLABLE CONTACT DEP
            a- ?ok.latf           I *!              *
            b-o-kaJatj"                             *
            c- klatf    *!       i

     S-obstruent clusters have falling sonority, so epenthesis at the edge is possible and
     preferred: ?is.biitf> slbiitf. An explanation is required to account for why the
     default site of epenthesis in loanwords is at the edge. Comparing edge to internal
     epenthesis proves each is satisfied at a cost. Edge epenthesis violates NOCODA
     and ONSET, while the dispreferred internal epenthesis actually satisfies NOCODA,
     ONSET and SYLLABLE CONTACT. She claims that the constraint that prefers edge
     epenthesis is CONTIGUITY:

     (27) Elements adjacent in the input must be adjacent in the output.

     This constraint ensures edge epenthesis is satisfied when SYLLABLE CONTACT
     does not matter. This is borne out in CA, too. Since both CONTIGUITY and DEP
     could be violated with almost the same effect, they are equally ranked:
     (28)     /sbiitf/   CONTIGUITY ; DEP
            a-^Pis.biitf            :*
            b- si.biitf •           i *!

     Rising sonority inputs show that CONTIGUITY must be ranked below
     SYLLABLECONTACTto derive the split pattern.
     (29) /klatf/        SYLLABLE CONTACT CONTIGUirY
            a- klatf     *!
            b-^ka.latf                               *
                                                                                      13




So, there are the two rankings necessary to derive the split epenthesis pattern as
shown in (30):

(30)    a.*C0MPLEX»DEP
       b.SYLLABLE CONTACT » CONTIGUITY

The final ranking that accounts for the position of the epenthetic vowel then is.-

(31)    "COMPLEX, SYLLABLE CONTACT » CONTIGUITY, DEP.


Thus interaction between SYLLABLE CONTACT and CONTIGUITY is able to
explain the pattern of split epenthesis in loanword phonology in CA, where falling
and rising sonority clusters are treated differently. The ranking so far should go
as:

(32) "COMPLEX, ONS, MAX-IO, SYLLABLE CONTACT » DEP-IO,
     ALIGN- <j, CONTIGUITY.

The quality of the Epenthetic Vowel

      This sub-section determines the constraints that control the quality of
epenthetic vowel. A common fact about epenthetic segments is that they lack
input counterparts. Their featural realization then is dependent upon output
factors. This is the situation in most languages of the world; epenthetic segments
are minimally marked and contextually colored. According to (Kager, 1999,
Selkirkl981, Ito, 1986, Lowenstamm and Kaye 1986) the epenthetic segment has
no lexical specification to be faithful to. It is totally dependent on context-free
markedness constraints. This would account for why [i] is so pervasive as an
epenthetic vowel cross-linguistically. It is featurally unmarked vowel. With
context-marked constraints, adjacent segments affect the featural value of
epenthetic segments through assimilation. Observe patterns of epenthesis in (33)
and (34).

(33)
        Arabic             English
         firizar            freezer
         biristul           Bristol (paper)
         fulurusint          florescent
         guruub              group
         kolatj"            clutch(auto)
(34)
         Pistiryu          stereo
         ?isbiitf          speech
14




              Pisbireeh        spray
              Pistaf           staff
              Pistub           stop
              bankinut         banknote
             Jarkiskiin        sharkskin cloth
              bustiman         postman

      In (33) there is a case of vowel harmony between the epenthetic vowel and the
     immediately following one. (34) presents yet a different type of epenthesis where
     the epenthetic segment is invariably [i] regardless of the features of the
     immediately following vowel. How can we account for this variation? In the two
     following subsections we account for the harmony and non-harmony cases.

          Harmony cases: According to Kramer (2002) featural identity of vowels
     which are moraically or syllabically adjacent in an output string can be accounted
     for by using the constraint SURFACE-IDENTITY (F) for which the general schema
     goes as:

     (35) Let a be a vowel in syllable/mora 2 and p be any correspondent of a in
     Syllable /moral.
             If P is [YF] then a is [yF], where p is an epenthetic vowel.
            ('An epenthetic vowel has to have the same value for a feature F as the
             vowel in the adjacent syllable or mora.')

     According to this constraint, the feature specifications of a 2 license the same
     features borne by the vowel in o 1. The feature specification here is done by a
     correspondence relation. This constraint is particularly useful for this case in CA.
     However since the relevant features for harmony, as evidenced by group A and B,
     occur in terms of +/-back, +/-round features, we need to state that the harmony
     between epenthetic vowel and the adjacent vowel should be set in terms of the
     features +/-back, +/-round. We would rather modify the constraint here as
     follows:

     (36) S-IDENT (+/-back, +/-round):
           Let a be a vowel in syllable 2 and p be any correspondent of a in syllable
           If P is [+/-back, +/-round] then a is [+/-back, +/-round], where P is an
     epenthetic vowel.

     This will take care of the harmony we see between the epenthetic vowel and the
     adjacent one as evident from (37).
                                                                                                        15




       ktaj"            S-lDENT                                                         ALIGN-a




                                                                  MAX-IO
                                                       •COMPLEX




                                                                           DEP-IO
                        (+/-back, +/-round):                                            a l <J2 CT3




                                                ONS
        •^a-ka. lat/                                                       *            ->mi =.
       b-ku.latj        *!                                                 *            -.HH

                        *!                                                 »
       c-kUat/
                                                      *!
                                                                                        -<n
       d-klat/



The non-harmony in terms of roundness makes (b) a suboptimal, mismatching
backness harmony renders (c) suboptimal as well, (d) is outranked due to a
violation of *COMPLEX .However, this constraint alone cannot predict the right
candidate in some cases. Let's take the case of the word
gurrub:

       gruub       S-IDENT (+/- ONS      •COMPLEX MAX-                              DEP-       ALIGN-
                   back, +/-                      IO                                IO         a
                   round):
                                                                                               o l a2
                                                                                               o3
       a-                                                                           *          ->nnn
       gu.ruub
       b-                                                                           *          •#w
       go.ruub

       c-          *!                                                               *          -.HUli
       gi.ruub
       d-          *!                                                               *          ->nnn
       ga.ruub

It is clear here that there is a tie situation between candidate (a) and candidate (b).
This is because both candidates equally satisfy or violate the relevant constraints.
Constraint S-IDENT (+/-back, +/-round) is not decisive in selecting the optimal
candidate. Both [guruub] and [goruub] satisfy backness and roundness harmony.
What then can decide whether (a) or (b) is the optimal form? We need some other
featural constraints. Since backness and roundness are not enough to decide the
exact epenthetic vowel, the features [+high][-high] will decide. The constraint
*[+high] "[-high]. *[+high] can be defined as:

(39)    Epenthetic vowels must not be -t-high.

*[-high] on the other hand is defined as:
16




     (40)   Epenthetic vowels must not be-high.

     The right candidate will win based on which one of this pair of constraints is
     ranked above the other. In the case of [guruub], "[-high] will have to dominate
     *[+high].

            /gruub/       S-lDENT                                                             ALIGN- o




                                                             MAX-IO
                                                  •COMPLEX




                                                                      *[-HGH]



                                                                                     DEP-IO
                           (+/-back, +/-                                        "x            a l a2
                                                                                 0




                                            ONS
                          round):                                                             a3
                                                                                I
            <s-a-                                                               »•   *        M»Ht»
            gu.ruub
                                                                                     •
            b- go.ruub                                                  •                     •.nnn
            c- gi.ruub    *i                                                         *         -."HH
            d- ga.ruub    *i                                                         *        -.|i u u


     The reason why I place these two constraints below the first equally ranked
     package of constraints is that in each case of harmonic epenthetic vowels, one of
     the two constraints will have to be violated.

           Non-harmonv cases: When the cluster s+obstruent is there, harmony is
     blocked and the epenthetic vowel is set as default [i] in all cases, no matter what
     type of vowel follows in the adjacent syllable. This is evidenced by the words:
     (42) Pistiryu, Pisbiit/, Pisbireeh, ?istaf, Pistuk, Pistub

     The first three words give an indication that we are still under harmony, yet the
     words Pistaf, Pistuk, Pistub show that there is no harmony. Moreover [i] is
     epenthesized as a default vowel in compounds such as [bankinut], [Jarkiskiin],
     [bustiman]. Since harmony is blocked here, the constraint S-IDENT must be
     dominated by some other constraint that makes [i] the default epenthetic vowel in
     all cases where s+ obstruent cluster intervenes or when an epenthetic intervenes
     between two roots. This constraint must have a blocking effect so as to prevent
     vowel harmony. I would make use of 'MULTIPLE (V.Place) constraint used by
     Uffmann(2001):

     (43)   V-to-V assimilation (harmony) is penalized.

     This constraint has the effect of stopping VI from being harmonic with V2 and as
     a result, with the absence of any identity between VI and V2, the default
     [if'shows up. So this constraint does the dual job of blocking harmony and
                                                                                     17




allowing [i] to emerge™. This constraint must rank higher than S-ident, since S-
ident should be violated to satisfy it.

       staf            •MULTIPLE (V.Place) S-lDENT
                                           (+/-back, +/-round)


       " a - Pis.taf                           *
          b-?as.taf    *i


         c-?us.taf *!
         d-?os.taf *!


(c) and (d) are suboptimal forms because, though in each VI is out of harmony
with V2 ,the defaultp] fails to show up .[i] must always be there where harmony
is not fulfilled.
The final ranking then goes as follows:

(45) *COMPLEX, ONS, MAX-IO, SYLLABLE CONTACT, "MULTIPLE
(V.Place)»S-lDENT

         (+/-back, +/-round)*[+high], [-high], DEP-IO, ALIGN- a,
         CONTIGUITY.

4 Conclusion

     The phonological adaptation of loanwords in CA is well accounted for under
OT. It is seen to emanate from constraints on syllable structure of CA. OT could
achieve one very important goal, the functional unity of analysis. The trigger for
all constraints is to militate against faithfulness to the input and normally to
achieve well-formedness (markedness) of the forms in accordance with the
syllable structure of CA. •COMPLEX, ONS, SYLLABLE CONTACT,
•MULTIPLE (V.Place) represent the force of markedness that militates against
identity, alignment and contiguity constraints, which stand for the opposing force
of faithfulness. MAX-IO is optimal (and undominated), and thus makes sure that
CA opts for epenthesis rather than deletion as a strategy for loanword adaptation;
so both MAX-IO and the other markedness constraints determine the nature of
vowel epenthesis in words CA loaned from English. Loanword adaptation, then,
can be set within the framework of this tug of war between faithfulness and well-
formedness constraints. The need to repair loanwords so as to conform to the
syllable structure in CA outweighs the need to preserve the integrity of
loanwords. Thus, ranking of the constraints and the way they interact are
conducive to a single unified target. Namely, to have output forms mat conform to
18




     the phonotactics of CA syllable structure. This is why OT is an output-, target-
     oriented theory. These facts about epenthesis in loanword adaptation are only
     captured by a theory that is capable of showing how constraints conspire to adapt
     the loanword into the phonotactics of the borrowing language, CA. This
     substantiates functional unity. OT proves advantageous in setting all rules of
     loanword adaptation in CA in a constraint-based perspective within the
     framework of this struggle of forces in between faithfulness and markedness.

          In all cases, loanwords are modified according to the productive phonological
     processes and constraints at work in the phonology of CA, as pointed out in
     section 2. Patterns of systematic modification arise according to the constraints of
     the native system .The analysis illustrates that loanword phonology does not
     require additional constraints, requiring only LI constraints; no need arises for L2
     specific constraints since, as we see, loanwords can be explained by LI
     constraints. This provides a piece of evidence in favor of the view that loanwords
     do not require a language to have a secondary phonological system alongside the
     primary one.

          The fact that CA opts for epenthesis rather than deletion as a strategy for
     adapting loanwords provides a piece of evidence to the cross-linguistically
     attested fact that epenthesis is a much more frequent repair strategy in loanwords
     than deletion. This is a reflection of the speakers' desire to maximally preserve
     the original input and shows that compared to deletion; epenthesis reflects less
     distortion of the adapted words.

                                                   NOTES
              ' Definitions of the constraints in this section are given in section 3.
          2
            Though glottal stop plays a role in ascertaining that onset should exist, the main focus of
     the paper will be vowel epenthesis. Therefore analysis of glottal stop is not discussed in this paper.
          3
            [a] has the afrontallophone [ae], which occurs withfrontconsonants as in [belied]
     'country'. For details see, Gary and Gamal (1982).
          4
             It was pointed out in 2. that a maximum of two consonants may occur in word or phrase
     final position, e.g. [faxr] 'pride', [?atl] 'killing'. The constraint 'COMPLEX «,), militating against
     the occurrence of complex codas is not at play.
          !
               Datain(18)and(19)fromGouskova(2002).
           6
             According to Williams (1998), if a nucleus is unlicensed (in our case the epenthetic vowel
     can not be licensed to be harmonic with the following vowel), it is typically pronounced as some
     default vowel; the actual quality of the vowel which appears varies from one language to another.
     Pater (2001), in his explanation of metathesis in Balantak, shows that in case of non-assimilation,
     the default vowel surfaces (schwa in Balantak) instead of an assimilated one. The default vowel is,
     also, the typical vowel that saves an otherwise ill-formed syllable as pointed out by Feng (2002).
     Since we see [i] in CA assumes functions similar to those mentioned above, this provides evidence
                                                                                                         19




that [i] is indeed the default vowel. Details of phonological feature structure of default [i] are not
dealt with in this research.
      7
         Remember this constraint takes care of the non-harmony s+obstruent cases and does not
affect such harmonic cases as [guruup] for instance.



                                     REFERENCES

Broselow, Ellen. (1983). "Non-obvious transfer: On predicting epenthesis
                  errors" in: S. Gass and Selinker, L. (eds.). Language
                   Transfer in Language Learning. Rowley, Mass.: Newbury
                  House. 269-280.

Broselow, Ellen. (1992). "Parametric Variation in Arabic Dialect Phonology". In
                    Ellen Broselow, Mushira Eid, and John McCarthy, eds.
                    Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics W (Papers from the Fourth
                    Annual Symposium on Arabic Linguistics). John Benjamins:
                    Amsterdam. Pp. 7-45.
 Davis, Stuart. (1998). "Syllable Contact in Optimality Theory." Journal of
                    Korean Linguistics 23:181-211.
 Feng, Guanjun. (2002). "Existential and Universal Anchoring: A Case Study of
                    Chinese Diminutive Affixation." Paper read at TLS: Texas
                    Linguistic society Conference VII. Austin, Texas.
Gary, Judith Olmsted, and Saad Gamal-Eldin. (1982). Cairene Egyptian
                    Colloquial Arabic. Lingua Descriptive Studies 6. Amsterdam:
                    North Holland.
Gouskova, Maria. (2002). "Falling sonority onsets, loanwords, and Syllable
                    Contact." In Andronis, Mary, Christopher Ball, Heidi Elston
                    and Sylvain Neuvel, eds. CLS 37: The Main Session. Papers
                   from the 37ih Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Vol. 1.
                    Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Hinds, Martin and El-Said Badawy. (1986). A Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic.
                    Beirut: Libraire De Liban.
Hooper, J. (1976). An Introduction to Natural Generative Phonology. New York:
                    Academic Press.
It6, Junko. (1986). Syllable Theory in Prosodic Phonology. Ph.D. Dissertation,
                    University of Massachusetts, Amherst. [Published by Garland,
                    New York, 1988].
Kager, Rene. (1999). Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                    Press.
Kramer, Martin. (2002). "A Correspondence Approach to Vowel Harmony and
                    Disharmony". Ms, UniversMt Dttsseldorf.
20




     Ladefoged, Peter. (2001). A course in phonetics.4th ed. Fort Worth: Harcourt
                        Brace Jovanovich.
     Lowenstamm, Jean and Jonathan Kaye. (1986). "Compensatory Lengthening in
                        Tiberian Hebrew" in L. Wetzels and E. Sezer, eds. Studies in
                        Compensatory Lengthening. Foris: Dordrecht.
     McCarthy, John J. and Alan S. Prince. (1993). Prosodic Morphology I: Constraint
                        Interaction and Satisfaction. Ms., University of Massachusetts,
                        Amherst and Rutgers University.
     McCarthy, John J. and Alan S. Prince. (1994). "The Emergence of the unmarked:
                        Optimality in Prosodic Morphology". In Merce Gonzalez
                        (ed.) Proceedings of the North East Linguistic Society 24.
                        Amherst, MA: Graduate Linguistic Student Association. 333-
                        379.
     Mester, Armin, and Jaye Padgett. (1994). "Directional Syllabification in
                        Generalized Alignment". Phonology at Santa Cruz, 3:79-85.

     Murray R.W. and T. Vennemann. (1983). "Sound change and syllable structure
                         in Germanic phonology". Language, 59:514-52$.
     Paradis, Carole, and Darlene Lacharite\ (1997). "Preservation and minimality in
                         loanword adaptation". Journal of Linguistics, 33:379-430.
     Pater, Joe. (2001). "Assimilation triggers metathesis in Balantak: Implications for
                         theories of possible repair in Optimality Theory Ms.
                         University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
     Prince, A and P. Smolensky. (1993). Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in
                         Generative GrammarMs. Rutgers University and the
                         University of Colorado.
     Roca, Iggy and Wyn Johnson. (1999). A Course in Phonology, Oxford:
                         Blackwell.
     Selkirk, Elisabeth O. (1981). "Epenthesis and Degenerate Syllables in Cairene
                         Arabic". In Hagit Borer and Yosef Aoun, eds., Theoretical
                         Issues in the Grammar of Semitic Languages. MIT Working
                         Papers in Linguistics, 3:209-232.
     Uffmann, Christian. (2001) "Patterns of Vowel Epenthesis (not only) in Shona
                         Loanwords". Paper presented at the fifth HIL phonology
                         conference, University of Potsdam, Germany.
     Vennemann, Theo. (1988). Preference laws for syllable structure and the
                         explanation of sound change. Berlin/New York/Amsterdam:
                         Mouton de Gruyter.
     Williams, Geoffrey. (1998). The Phonological basis of Speech Recognition.
                         Unpublished PhD. dissertation, School of Oriental and African
                         studies, University of London.
