                On stress and syllabification

Item Type       Article

Authors         McCarthy, John J

Download date   2026-08-25 04:35:56

Link to Item    https://hdl.handle.net/20.500.14394/32507
On Stress and Syllabification
Author(s): John J. McCarthy
Source: Linguistic Inquiry, Vol. 10, No. 3 (Summer, 1979), pp. 443-465
Published by: The MIT Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4178121
Accessed: 25/06/2009 16:29

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.

Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mitpress.

Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.




                The MIT Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Linguistic Inquiry.




http://www.jstor.org
                                      Linguistic lnquiry Volumne10 Number 3 (Summer, 1979) 443-465.



John J. McCarthy                      On Stress and Syllabification*




0. Introduction
Of all the diverse properties of segmental strings, syllable structure is the one that stress
rules most often refer to. In fact, they refer to a quite specific aspect of syllable
structure: syllable weight. Generally, it is this distinction between heavy and light
syllables that affects the placement of stress. The richness of this problem is apparent
from its ramifications. First, in many languages the notion "heavy syllable" invokes a
disjunction of syllables containing a long vowel or diphthong and syllables with a short
vowel but closed by a consonant. Second, though heavy syllables often attract the
stress, they sometimes reject it or attract it subject to some limitations of, say, distance
from a boundary. Third, the weight of some syllables may itself vary in a particular
language, perhaps again under some boundary conditions. All of these issues are illus-
trated concretely in subsequent sections of this article.
      None of these observations is new, and previous work has not failed to attempt
explanations of at least some of them. I know of four quite different approaches in the
literature, discussed very briefly here.

0.1 . Arrested Syllables
Allen (1973) offers an essentially physiological account based on Stetson's (1951) theory
of syllables as chest-pulses. Allen holds that the oral arrest of closed (CVC) syllables
is paralleled by thoracic arrest of long open (CVV) syllables. Another arrest, the arrest
of "stress pulses", tends to be reinforced by these syllabic arrests, resulting in a general
attraction of stress to CVC and CVV syllables.
     Although Allen's proposal has come under heavy criticism in some recent work
(Hyman (1977a)), it nevertheless represents a unique attempt to explain why consonants
and vowels form a natural class for stress rules solely in the postnuclear position of a
syllable.
0.2. Stress andt Duration
It is difficult to do justice here to Hyman's (1977a) analyses of a great variety of
languages. In essence, his theoretical proposal is a functional one, depending crucially
      * I am grateful to Morris Halle, Paul Kiparsky, Alan Prince, Jean-Roger Vergnaud, Nick Clements, and
Ellen Woolford for much useful discussion of this material. Errors of form or interpretation are my own. This
work was partly supported by an NSF Graduate Fellowship.
444                             JOHN    J. MCCARTHY


on the observation that, all other things being equal, stressed syllables are longer than
unstressed ones. Particular languages have perceptual or articulatory reasons for keeping
some class of vowels short, so these vowels resist stressing, since it would inevitably
cause them to lengthen. Probably the most common case of this is a language with
phonemic vowel length. Since lengthening of short vowels under stress would tend to
neutralize this length contrast, the speaker has a perceptual motivation to draw stress
away from short vowels and maintain the phonemic contrast.
     But Hyman also notes a problem for this theory. Many languages have rules of the
sort "stress a heavy syllable, but if there isn't one, stress a light syllable", subject to
the parameters "rightmost" and "leftmost". Therefore, he proposes a complementary
tendency for heavy syllables to attract stress. It is the interplay of these two principles
that yields the most common stress patterns.
     One interesting result of Hyman's proposal will also come under discussion later.
He recalls a universal principle attributed to Jakobson and Trubetzkoy that any language
that contrasts syllable weight must also contain a vowel length contrast. According to
his account, it is the perceptual motive of maintaining this vowel length contrast that
induces the rejection of stress by short vowels in open syllables and the consequent
stressing of heavy syllables.


0.3. Weak Clusters
Chomsky and Halle (1968) virtually propose two different theories of the role of syllable
weight in phonological rules. The fundamental issue of this sort in English phonology
is the behavior of so-called weak clusters, defined by Chomsky and Halle (1968, 83;
slightly altered here):
                                              -syll
      (1)   Weak Cluster    -+tense]0         +scont1
                                             L-ant
The two segments on the right select a single consonant or a cluster of a consonant plus
a liquid or glide. So the segment on the left is a lax vowel in an open syllable. In view
of Kahn's (1976) extension of (1) to Vst(r) as well, the relationship of weak clusters to
English syllabification is evident.
     In a strictly formal sense, Chomsky and Halle eschew direct reference to syllable
weight. In fact, they concede (1968, 241, note) that the appearance of the context (1) in
at least four different rules indicates a defect in their theory. But there is a possible
remedy to this in a notation they adopt earlier just for expository convenience. They
use W to indicate (1) considered as a single unit in phonological rules.
     We could develop this idea into a theory in which languages can define certain
strings as heavy or light syllables, allowing repeated reference to syllable weight at little
formal cost. But this putative theory makes very weak claims. It says nothing about the
                                ON STRESS    AND   SYLLABIFICATION


attraction of stress to heavy syllables nor about the equivalence of long to closed
syllables. It allows free dependence of syllable weight on arbitrary segmental features.
Finally, if we permit structural descriptions like S , meaning "'a syllable, if it is light"
                                                  (L)
(Welden (1977)), then we are treating these new units like phonological features, effec-
tively allowing an unlimited set of features.

0.4. Moras
The Prague school mora (Trubetzkoy (1969); Jakobson (1971a)) is an abstract property
of syllables. Syllables themselves are not exhaustively parsed into moras-rather, the
 mora measures the weight of a syllable. A light syllable is associated with or contains
one mora, a heavy syllable two moras, and syllables of greater weight three or presum-
 ably more moras (Lecerf (1974)). A closed syllable with a short vowel (CVC) is mon-
omoraic or bimoraic, under language-particular conditions.
      The utility of this theory is well known to students of meter: it explains the common
 substitution of a heavy syllable for two light syllables and the converse (de Chene
(1977)). Its application to accentual systems is specific to fixed demarcative stress
(Jakobson (1971b)). In the general case, this type of stress assigns an accent some
 numbern of moras distant from a boundary unit (for Latin, Jakobson (197 1b); for Greek,
Jakobson (1971c)) or from another accent (for Southern Paiute, Sapir (1930)). As long
as n is small-perhaps one or two moras-it is unlikely that bimoraic syllables will be
 skipped over in accentuation.
      This is certainly an attractive result, but the moraic theory has a serious lacuna.
 Many languages (like Classical Arabic, described below) attract stress onto a heavy
syllable regardless of the remoteness of a boundary. The unboundedness of this phe-
nomenon prevents a mora-counting solution, but the attraction of stress to heavy
 syllables is still displayed. The moraic theory, then, though explanatory in one class of
examples, fails to make a prediction in another, related class.
      My alternative proposal is based on the metrical theory of stress in Liberman and
Prince (1977), together with some of the conceptual apparatus of the Prague school. It
offers a mostly formal account of the same problems with which these earlier treatments
were concerned. In what follows, I draw on Liberman and Prince (1977) and unpublished
work by Paul Kiparsky, Morris Halle, Alan Prince, and Jean-Roger Vergnaud. Empirical
justification and illustration come from the synchronic and diachronic description of
Classical Arabic and some eastern Arabic dialects, though other phenomena are occa-
sionally alluded to.


1. Cairene Colloquial
Perhaps the most interesting accentual phenomena of Arabic are found in a dialect
spoken in Egypt from Cairo northward. Harrell (1957) gives three principal stress rules
446                                   JOHN   J. MCCARTHY


for this dialect, along with a few morphological exceptions: 1
      (2) a.     Stress the ultima if it is a superheavy syllable (CVCC or CVVC):
                 katabt 'I wrote', sakakiin 'knives'
          b.     Otherwise stress the antepenultimate syllable if the antepenult and penult
                 are light syllables (CV), unless the preantepenult is also light:
                 buixala 'misers', muxtalifa 'different (f. sg.)'
          c.     Otherwise stress the penultimate syllable:
                 martaba 'mattress', Tamalti 'you (f. sg.) did', beetak 'your (m. sg.) house',
                 katabitu 'she wrote it (m.)'
This rule offers several notable peculiarities to an investigation of the relationship
between heavy syllables and stress.
     First, there is some evidence of a ternary syllable weight distinction. Word-inter-
nally, the stress rule contrasts light syllables (CV) with heavy syllables (CVC or CVV).
Word-finally, stress lodges on a superheavy syllable (CVVC or CVCC), but a word-
final CVC syllable fails to attract the stress: Iniddrris 'teacher', dabadan 'never'.
Although word-final CVV syllables are always stressed-nisii 'he forgot him', saftu
'they saw him'-l argue later that this is due to other properties of the derivation of
these forms. In sum, there are two binary syllable weight distinctions, light versus
heavy word-internally, and light and heavy versus superheavy word-finally.
     Second, there is a Janus-like aspect to (2b). It stresses the antepenult, but it must
also take note of the weight of both the preceding and the following syllables. Ordinarily,
stress rules are sensitive only to conditions exclusively to the right or the left of the
focus.
     Third, perhaps the most notable characteristic of this dialect is the rejection of
stress by heavy antepenults: inartdba 'mattress', iktibii 'they write', miidarrisit 'teacher
(f. construct)'. Since stress can go as far back as the antepenult, and since heavy
syllables are stressed in penult position, this treatment of heavy antepenults is genuinely
anomalous. It goes exactly counter to the universal tendency of stress assignment
described in the introduction.
     If that were all, then we might simply be compelled to accept occasional deviations
from the attraction of stress to heavy syllables. Fortunately, though, additional data
suggest a subtle realignment of the relationship of stress to syllabification. The examples
in (2) exhaust the possible arrangements of heavy and light syllables in words of the
Cairene dialect. But Classical Arabic words have a much richer set of canonical patterns,
allowing very long strings of light syllables. Since there is no pandialectal tradition for
stressing Classical Arabic, in many regions the colloquial stress rule is applied to
Classical Arabic forms.

       In the transcription followed here, S and hi are voiced and voiceless pharyngeal glides, respectively.
A subscripted dot indicates emphatic (velarized or pharyngealized) pronunciation. From the outset, 1 adopt
a bimoraic representation of long vowels, anticipating the discussion in section 3. Many irrelevant shadings
of vowels are not indicated.
                                       ON STRESS      AND    SYLLABIFICATION


    Mitchell (1975) reports the pronunciation of a large number of Classical Arabic
words by two Egyptians educated in Cairo.2 Their treatment of words with the same
canonical pattern as those in (2) shows that the Cairene rule holds as well for their
pronunciation of Classical Arabic:
      (3) a.      darabt 'I/you (sg.) beat', hajjaat 'pilgrimages'
          b.      kataba 'he wrote', ?inka'sara 'it got broken'
          c.      qattala 'he killed', kataibta'you (m. sg.) wrote', haaoaani 'these (m. du.)',
                  faValdtun 'deed (nom.)'
So the accentuation of Classical Arabic words is another source of information about
the form of the Cairene stress rule.
     By Harrell's formulation in (2), we expect (2c) to give penult stress whenever the
penult, antepenult, and preantepenult are light, like katabitii. Classical Arabic words
with longer strings of light syllables than katabitit sometimes observe (2) and sometimes
do not:
      (4) a.      Observe (2):
                  sajaratun 'tree (nom.)'
                  sajaratuhdmaa 'their (du.) tree (nom.)'
                  2adwiyatdhu 'his drugs (nom.)'
           b.     Violate (2):
                  sajaratuhu 'his tree (nom.)'
                  ?adwiyatihumaa 'their (du.) drugs (nom.)'
Clearly, Harrell's rule does not extend to forms like those in (4b).
    Mitchell never formulates a uniform rule to stress these words, though he does give
a thorough list of canonical patterns. On the basis of these, we can extract some
coherent generalizations (Langendoen (1968)):

      (5) a.      Stress a superheavy ultima.
          b.      Otherwise stress a heavy penult.
          c.      Otherwise stress the penult or antepenult, whichever is separated by an
                  even number of syllables from the rightmost nonfinal heavy syllable or,
                  if there is no nonfinal heavy syllable, from the left boundary of the word.

This rule covers all of Harrell's cases and Mitchell's as well. (5b) stresses the penult in,
say, amadlti. Under rule (Sc), biixala contains no heavy syllable, so we begin counting
parity at the left boundary of the word. The antepenult then receives the stress because
zero syllables-an even number-separate it from the left boundary. The preantepenult

       2 Other sources of data of this type are Harrell (1960) and Kussaim (1968). There is a quite shallow
argument against using evidence of this sort, since Classical Arabic is learned in school. Actually, this is no
different from using uncommon or nonsense words to test a rule's productivity. In fact, it is of great
significance that the stress rule applies in a particular way to forms that do not occur in the colloquial.
448                             JOHN   J. MCCARTHY


is the rightmost heavy syllable of 2inkadsara,and zero syllables separate it from the
antepenult, which then receives the accent.
     Though this may seem a bizarre rule, formally similar stress rules are not all that
uncommon. I am aware of two others. The stressing of some forms in Plautine Latin is
one such example, described in section 5. Another is the tonal accentuation of Creek
words without inherent accent. Haas (1977) presents the following data:

      (6) a.   s6kca 'sack', pocoswa 'axe'
          b.   haitkii 'white', hoktii 'woman'
          c.   ifa' dog', if6ci 'puppy', amifoci 'my puppy', waakoci'calf', alpatoci 'baby
               alligator', iikosapita 'one to implore'

The forms in (6a) show stressing of a heavy penult when the ultima is light. Heavy
ultimas apparently induce morphologically-governed accentuation, as in (6b). For ex-
amples like (6c), Haas formulates a principle that I will informally paraphrase as: accent
the penult or ultima, whichever is separated by an odd number of syllables from the
rightmost nonfinal heavy syllable or the first syllable.
      Both the Cairene and the Creek rules show that the relationship between syllable
weight and stress or accent assignment can be quite subtle. Notice that these rules
combine properties that, separately, are all reasonably familiar. The search for a right-
most (or leftmost) heavy syllable that terminates at word-boundary is common; in fact,
Classical Arabic is an example of it, as I show in section 4.3. The feature of parity-
counting, distinguishing odd from even syllables or moras, is characteristic of, say,
Southern Paiute. Finally, the limitation of stress to one of the last two or three syllables
in the word corresponds closely to the Dreisilbengesetz of Classical Latin.
     Some of the theories outlined in the introduction propose explanations for one or
another of these properties. For instance, the tendency to stress heavy syllables explains
why a rule might seek the rightmost heavy syllable. If this tendency is thwarted by the
absence of a heavy syllable, the rule defaults to the last syllable it sees. But rules of the
Cairene type seek that syllable not to stress it but rather to begin again with a whole
new procedure. So this tendency makes no prediction here.
     Another case of this is the phenomenon sometimes called a law of limitation. In
demarcative stress languages, we can speak of a law that governs the maximum distance
between the stress and the word-boundary. The Classical Latin Dreisilbengesetz, lim-
iting stress to the last three syllables, is a good example of this. Rules of this sort have
received the most attention from the Prague school. This theory takes the limitation to
be an effect of counting syllables or moras from the boundary. In particular, mora-
counting should explain disjunctions of the sort "accent a heavy penult, otherwise the
antepenult". But again rules of the Cairene type defy this simple account; the stressing
of penult or antepenult depends both on their weight and on the weight of other syllables
to the left. In this case, then, the mora-counting solution explains only part of the rule.
     Evidently, stress rules of the Cairene type are inexplicable under two theories that
                                       ON STRESS      AND   SYLLABIFICATION




offer a connection between stress and syllable weight. Only the theory that makes the
weakest claims, the formalism of Chomsky and Halle (1968), can overcome the vicis-
situdes of these accent rules. Consider the following formulation of clause (5c) of the
Cairene stress rule: 3
     (7)    V   -*    [+stress] / # (Q V [+seg]) (CVCV)o C                    (CV) CV ([+seg]) #
Although this rule is quite complex, its mode of application is reasonably perspicuous.
The first parenthesized term selects the rightmost heavy syllable if there is one. The
second parenthesized term skips over the largest possible even number of light syllables.
Material after the focus selects the antepenult or otherwise the penult.
      The formal complexity of (7) does have some consequences. Chiefly, it claims that
rules of the Cairene type are much less highly valued than rules that just seek a rightmost
heavy syllable, that count parity, that stress the penult or antepenult, or that combine
two of these properties. This claim is quite difficult to verify, but at least we have seen
that the Cairene rule is scarcely a unique exponent of its type. A far more serious
objection depends on a form of argument developed by Anderson (1974) in his discussion
of the parenthesis-star notation. Notice that the material in the second set of parenthe-
ses-CVCV-exactly        duplicates the material in the focus and immediately adjacent to
it. In other words, this notation requires the duplication of information about adjacent
light syllables. Though this is not an intolerable consequence, it certainly adds to the
faults of this theory already described in the introduction.

2. Metrical Phonology
A different solution to Cairene stress not only eliminates these assorted problems but
also leads to an explanatory model of the relationship between stress and syllable
weight. The basis of this solution is Liberman and Prince's (1977) metrical theory of
phonology. I will further assume a suggestion made by Alan Prince in unpublished work
that the feature [stress] be eliminated. Therefore, all stress information is encoded
directly in the metrical trees, and the stress rules of a language are simply rules for the
geometry and labeling of metrical trees.
     In Liberman and Prince's (1977) model, a tree that handles the Cairene accent
should have the following characteristics:
     (8) a.       Binary feet are assigned from left to right to pairs of light syllables. That
                  is:

                     ...H
                            A A          A
                            L L L L L...or#
                                                         AAA
                                                L L L L L...
           b.     A right-branching superstructure gathers up all feet and stray syllables in
                  the word.
      3 A similar version is given by Langendoen (1968). Welden (1977) offers a formulation of this rule in
terms of syllables, where syllable weight is referred to by the feature-like notation described in section 0.3.
450                                       JOHN    J. MCCARTHY


             c.         The entire tree is labeled according to the principle that a right node is
                        strong (s) if and only if it branches.
If the tree is assembled in this way, then the designated terminal element (the terminal
node of the tree that is dominated only by ss) will mark the stress-bearing syllable.
      On some typical examples, the informal stages of tree construction are:
(9)                a.                  b.                 c.                       d.
                   A                                           A                 A A
by (8a)           buxala             Samalti           muxtalifa               sajaratuhumaa




by (8b)           buxala
                            A          7>/\
                                     qamalti           muxtalifa               sajaratuhumaa




                        s                   s                   S                 w      w
                   s w w              w     s w          w      s w w           s w s w s           w

by (8c)           buxala              iamalt i         muxtal      ifa        saj arat uhumaa
Note that the heavy penult of ai?amdltiand the heavy ultima of sajaratlillitmaa cannot
be assigned to feet by (8a), which applies only to light syllables. They instead receive
metrical structure only from the right-branching word-level tree.
    Example (9d) independently confirms the exact nature of the stress tree. Mitchell
reports an overall pitch pattern for this word of the following form:
      (10)




                  sa ja      ra tu   hu maa
There is a general downdrift across the word, and a sharp fall on the stressed syllable.
But the syllables sa and ra, which are each locally more prominent, have higher pitch
than their sister constituents. This is evidence, then, that foot-level prominence relations
play some role in the pitch contours within words.4
      4Welden (1977) presents quite extensive data on secondary stress with some surprising properties. But
facts described independently by Harrell (1960, 10) and Abul-Fadl (1961, 241) contradict much of her data.
These latter authors both ascribe secondary stress to every heavy syllable that is not primary-stressed. This
is presumably a result of some late phonetic adjustment unrelated to the metrical trees.
                                      ON STRESS      AND   SYLLABIFICATION


      Some of the advantages of the solution outlined in (8) are already apparent, although
it still awaits formalization. First, the parity-counting is stipulated once and for all by
a single rule of foot assignment. Second, it is unnecessary to refer to a disjunction of
rightmost heavy syllable and left word boundary. Instead, the left-to-right assignment
of feet applies whenever (8) finds adjacent light syllables. Third, the stressing of heavy
penults is brought under the same rubric as the other syllable patterns.
      But although rule (8) works correctly in the vast majority of cases, there are two
sets of apparent exceptions to it. One involves the stressing of superheavy ultimas; this
will be dealt with shortly. The other class of exceptions is under morphological govern-
ment. If a third person feminine singular verb is followed by a pronominal object clitic,
the accent falls on the feminine inflectional suffix: kallim+it+ak 'she spoke to you (m.
sg.), ram+it +il 'she threw it (m.)'. The expected stressing of these words by rule (8)
is "kalli,nitak and *raimitui.If these forms appear without the pronominal clitic, the
stress is as expected: kalli'mit, rdmit.
      The metrical tree notation permits an explanatory but very restrictive account of
this exception. A morphologically-governed rule creates a branching node over the
verbal suffix +it and any following material:5
       (11) +it+X
               1 2 => 1           2
If the variable X is a null string, then the branching node will simply not be created by
rule (11), since inherently the tree notation only expresses relations between nonnull
elements. If X is nonnull, then rule (8) will follow (I I), correctly assigning the remainder
of the metrical structure to this word, and labeling the entire tree. No conflict between
the two rules of tree assignment is possible since the notation does not allow overlapping
trees, giving precedence to the earlier rule.
     This natural treatment of exceptionality within the metrical theory explains why
+it is stressed only when it is followed by other material. It also restricts or orders the
possible exceptions. For instance, if +it always induced final stress in *kallimitadk,
 ramit,l then rule (I 1) would need to create labeling as well as structure. The labeling
of these exceptional forms comes from a general rule of the phonology.

3. Syllabification
It is a somewhat different matter to incorporate into these rules the stressing of the
ultima, an issue that leads to a formal treatment for heavy syllables. I will first review
the facts of final stress. A superheavy (CVVC or CVCC) ultima is always stressed. A
light or a closed heavy (CVC) ultima is not stressed: ?amalti 'you (f. sg.) did', maddaris
 schools'. Given the parallel behavior of CVC and CVV syllables word-internally, we
might expect them to behave alike word-finally. Confusingly, an open heavy (CVV)
ultima is always stressed in colloquial words but unstressed in Classical Arabic words

     5 A similarly anomalous penult stress occurs in plural nouns like sibita 'baskets' or dubil7a 'hyenas'.
Apparently a rule like ( 11)is associated with this plural morphology.
452                                    JOHN    J. MCCARTHY


that are otherwise stressed in conformity with the colloquial pattern. The solution to
this evident inconsistency comes from an examination of the source of stressed CVV
ultimas in the colloquial.
     With only rare exceptions, stressed word-final CVV syllables are the surface reflex
of a third person masculine singular objective or genitive suffix on a verb, preposition,
or noun: ramaa 'he threw him', 9axill 'his brother'. Actually, these forms have super-
heavy final syllables at a more remote stage of the derivation, and so are stressed
regularly.6 Besides maintaining the parallel between CVV and CVC syllables, two other
arguments support this position.
     First, all these forms with a stressed final long vowel are in stylistically-conditioned
variation with forms with final h: ramaah, ?ax'luh. The forms with h are apparently
characteristic of slow or emphatic speech (Tomiche (1964); Harrell (1957)). Since h is
invariant when part of the stem (e.g. mindbbih 'alarm clock'), I follow Brame's (1971)
suggestion for a similar phenomenon in a Levantine dialect and restrict deletion to
suffixal h:
      (12)   h   -     / [+suffix] #
      Brame presents an argument from this dialect that also carries over to Cairene. If
a dative suffix follows the third person masculine singular object suffix, the h shows up
overtly: rama +hu +lha 'he threw it (m.) to her'. Brame argues that this morpheme is
subject to a metathesis rule, and I will assume that the same is true of Cairene. Since
the full analysis would take us too far afield, I refer the reader to Broselow (1976, 130)
for a version of this rule.
     Pace deletion of final h, then, the problem is very simple to state: the final syllable
is stressed if and only if it has the canonical pattern CVVC or CVCC. Since the final
syllable is always the right daughter of any tree it is associated with, it should never be
labeled s by (8c). Therefore, ultima stress is impossible under our present understanding.
     But notice this one peculiarity of the canonical syllables CVVC and CVCC: they
are possible syllables of Cairene only in word-final position. The maximal word-internal
syllables are simple heavy CVV and CVC. Suppose minimally that syllables are asso-
ciated (after Kahn (1976)) with simple syllabic trees:

      (13)       ar                 ai
              A
             c v
                                 /1\
                                c vv
                                                      /1\
                                                     c vc
Each node o- is immediately and exhaustively dominated by a terminal s or u node of
the strcss tree generated by (8). In a way that we could easily further specify, the binary
and ternary branching syllable trees of (13) exhaustively parse the segments of Arabic

       6
         Alternatively, CVV ultimas could be stressed by a morphological rule associated with the objective
suffix. The very rare words like gat6io 'cake' and hayaa 'life' would then be costly positive exceptions to this
rule. This nonphonological solution, while unnecessary in Cairene, seems appropriate to account for similar
facts in Damascene Arabic.
                                      ON STRESS      AND    SYLLABIFICATION


words with one exception: the superheavy CVVC and CVCC ultimas. A new rule allows
these strings to be parsed as well by Chomsky-adjoining a word-final consonant to a
preceding heavy syllable:


     (14)          0f                                                          Or

             C V        [+seg] C #C

                  1              2 3 C     1#2 3           i.e. C V [+seg]            C #


     What rule (14) says is that a superheavy ultima is a syllable which also contains a
heavy syllable as its left daughter. That heavy syllable-the subordinate a-of the derived
structure-becomes in effect a heavy penult, since it is the second last major constituent
in the word. It therefore is stressed like any heavy penult. I will show shortly how
exactly to bring this about through the metrical formalism.
     Rule (14) explains something about the weight of final syllables in Cairene. It also
suggests that we might look further, into the syllables themselves, for further evidence
of hierarchic structure. A proposal in this vein, first made and developed by Paul
Kiparsky in class lectures,7 is that each segment is the terminal node of a binary-
branching tree of ss and wvs,where the root is the syllable node (T.In conformity with
the usual observations about syllable structure, relative prominence in the tree is mapped
onto relative sonority of segments. Thus, the designated terminal element is the syllabic

                                                           w    s
                                                           I    I
nucleus, an obstruent plus sonorant cluster is C C, and so on. A specification of the
possible syllabic trees, along with some language-specific conditions on the way in
which they are associated with strings of segments, constitutes the syllabification rules
of a language.8 Note that this theory is entirely neutral with respect to questions of
when syllabification occurs. I will, however, assume that strings are syllabified in
underlying representation and successively after each stage of the derivation. This most
strongly limits the derived structures of rules of epenthesis, syncope, and so on.
     The special character of this treatment of syllabification is that it considers some
substrings of syllables to be structural units. The adduction of evidence on this point
depends on the following logic. Suppose we have some string of units hierarchically
arranged with proper bracketing. Suppose further that all rules, or some class of rules,
refer to the hierarchy. Then rules referring to nonconstituents will be more costly
formally, and therefore less highly valued, than rules referring to constituents. For

      7A similar structure, though without labels, was proposed by Prince (1975).
      8
        For further discussion of metrical structure inside syllables, particularly in segmental phonological
rules, see McCarthy (1977; forthcoming).
454                                  JOHN    J. MCCARTHY


instance, long vowels can have a bimoraic representation but also be associated with a

                            s   w
                            I   I
single metrical unit: V V. Then any rule applying to this entire structure will affect
both moras as if they were a single segment. I claim that all vowel length is represented
in this way.
     A very plausible constituent analysis within the syllable is the rhyme-the syllable
nucleus plus any following vowel or consonant. In this notation, the rhyme is defined
as the right branch of cr. Thus, the rhyme is the circled constituent in the syllable trees
( 5a-c):


      (15) a.          cr                     b.       or          c.       c




                  I IIXW                             IwI/ IC
                 C      V                               VC              C       V

Evidence for this constituent is quite extensive, and is scarcely exhausted by the
following list:
       i. In Lithuanian "the accent may strike not only vowels but also postvocalic
sonorants, provided that they belong to the same syllable as the immediately preceding
vowels" (Kiparsky and Halle (1977)). That is, the accent may lie on any nonobstruent
within the rhyme.
      ii. Kahn (1976) argues that English vowels destress only if they are syllable final.
That is, a vowel must exhaust the rhyme for destressing to apply.
    iii. Complementarily, the English pig Latin rule severs and postposes the syllable
onset, the segments not in the rhyme.9
    iv. French vowels assimilate in nasality to following tautosyllabic consonants.
Therefore, the rhyme is the domain of the feature [+nasal].
So the reality of a rhyme unit in many phonological rules is not difficult to establish,
and we have a notation to express that reality. There is a good deal more to say about
this, but first we need one other basic notion to allow a synthesis of syllable structure
and stress.

      91 am indebted to Will Leben for pointing this out to me.
                                    ON STRESS        AND    SYLLABIFICATION


     Vergnaud (ms.) proposes a theory of phonology in which all rules operate on
projections-phonologically-defined     sets of substrings-of strings of segments. For ex-
ample, many vowel harmony rules apply to the projection of all [+syll] segments in a
word. This idea can be fruitfully extended to the issue under consideration. 10 If segments
are hierarchically arranged within syllables, as I have argued, then a projection rule
could refer to individual segments or to some constituents of the syllabic tree. Thus, we
can project all the vowels in a word or all the rhymes in a word or even all the syllables.
If a language has structures like those in (15), then we cannot, except perhaps at great
formal cost, project all CV sequences in a word. But in the particular case in which a
rule projects all and only the rhymes in a word (where rhyme is defined as above, the
right branch of v-), then syllable weight has an obvious geometric interpretation: heavy
syllables branch, light syllables do not. Clearly, not all stress rules will project rhymes-
some project every vowel or every syllable-but all must project a constituent of the
syllabic tree.
     With some further elaboration, this mechanism explains the asymmetry between
CVV and CVC syllables. Recall the principle attributed to Trubetzkoy and Jakobson:
a language treats CVC syllables as heavy only if it treats CVV syllables as heavy. So
there exist languages that have CVV and CVC syllables where CVV is heavy but CVC
is not. Two languages of this sort may be Yidin" (Dixon (1977)) and Tiberian Hebrew
(McCarthy (1979)). My proposal is that the syllable-structure repertory of these lan-
guages is as shown in (16):


    (16) a.           O'                b.             cr                     c.       cr




                 w         s                     w     s        w                  w   s    w

                 C         V                     C    V         V                  C   V    C

It follows that languages with syllabification like that in (16) do not have branching
rhymes in CVC syllables, though they do have branching rhymes in CVV syllables,
where rhyme is understood in the strict sense as the right branch of o. The purely
geometric account of syllable weight offered here will capture exactly this difference.
     There is, of course, a complementary problem presented by Trubetzkoy and Ja-
kobson's universal. We have to exclude languages with heavy CVC syllables but with
light CVV or without CVV syllables. That is, we have to eliminate structural inventories

     10This suggestion is due to Morris Halle.
456                                  JOHN   J. MCCARTHY


such as those shown in (17a,b):


      (17) a.


                        0r                          s




                w            s         w      s         w
                l       I        I             I        I
                C            V         C      V         C

           b.                                 CCi



                                                    s            s


                w            s         w      s         w   w        s    w

                    I        I          I       ~~ I ~
                                             ~~~~~~~~~~I    ~I       I     I
                    C        V         C      V         C   C        V    V


(17a) describes a language with heavy CVC syllables but without CVV syllables, while
(17b) allows light CVV syllables and heavy CVC syllables. Not only should the theory
exclude (17), it should also allow a principled choice between grammars with (16) and
grammars with (15).
      In fact, the theory of metrical syllabification does just this in a very natural way.
 Suppose that syllabification in general refers to only three parameters: the labeling of
 the rhyme, the branching or nonbranching character of the rhyme, and the major
 category features like [syllabic], [consonantal], and [sonorant]. Then the grammar of ( 15)
 must say only that weak rhymes (those labeled w) are forbidden. The grammar of (16),
 on the other hand, allows strong rhymes only if the segments in the rhyme are all
 [+syll]. Another possible grammar-for a language with (16a,b) but without closed
 syllables-also has [+syll] strong rhymes but prohibits weak rhymes. Still other lan-
guages may allow only rhymes with [-cons] segments or only rhymes with [+son]
 segments. Finally, a language with CV syllables exclusively prohibits branching rhymes
 entirely. But it is impossible under this theory to require that the two segments in a
 rhyme consistently disagree in some feature, so the structures in (17) are ruled out
 universally. Although other formal means of achieving this result suggest themselves,
 this one does make full use of the labeling and structures that are independently needed
for the stress rules.
                                       ON STRESS     AND       SYLLABIFICATION


4. Exemplification
4.1. Cairene Colloquial
We can now explain some of the properties of the informal algorithm (8) for creating
Cairene metrical structure. The first operation is to project all the rhymes of the word,
yielding (18) from (9), for example:
    (18)         a.                        b.                    c.                    d.

                                       s        w          s w                              s w
                      I. .             I                   I          . * .                     I
             u1a a                 a a          II     u x aIa                   aaauua                 a
Feet are formed over pairs of light syllables. This property is expressed by a formal
condition on foot assignment in Cairene:
    (19)   In a foot [n, n2], n1 and n2 do not branch.
I will stipulate that this assignment of feet is from left to right, yielding (20) from (18):
    (20)         a.                        b.                    c.                    d.

                                       s w             s w                                          s   w

             u
              A.aa                 .1 I1jj1A,
                                   a    1     u xa                      ia
                                                                                 A
                                                                                 a a a u u a
                                                                                            .           a
As a result of (19), the rhymes of heavy syllables and the feet have identical geometry.
Finally, these structures are gathered together into a right-branching word-level tree.
     The same projection mechanism applies to words with superheavy word-final syl-
lables, though the results are a little different. Recall that superheavy syllables have a
structure that includes two a-nodes, as in (14). The rule that projects rhymes refers
formally to "the right branch of a", so in fact superheavy syllables contain two rhymes,
and they will project as two units. For instance, the word sakakuin yields the following
projection of rhymes:
    (21)

                 s        w

                 I I
           aai        1       fl

This is then geometrically equivalent to a word with a heavy penult, and receives stress
in exactly the same way.
     There is one remaining technical problem. Consider again a word like maddaris,
with a heavy-though not superheavy-final syllable. The full metrical structure as-
458                                    JOHN J. MCCARTHY


signed to this word except for the labeling is:
      (22)




                       /   s       w     s            w
                   /       I       I     I            I
              a            a       a     I            s
Now if we attempt to label this tree by rule (8c), we will incorrectly get stress on the
final syllable, since it is a branching node. The difficulty here is that rule (8c) treats the

                                             s        w

branching of syllable rhymes like i      s on an equal footing with the branching of foot-
and word-level structure.
     There is a clear precedent for a solution to this in Liberman and Prince (1977). Rule
(8c) is identical to the labeling rule associated with compound words in English, as a
few examples show:
      (23) a.                                    b.


                                                               w                     s


                       s       w                          sw               s             w

                   labor union                        labor        union   finance
                                                                      committee
Now notice that the labeling of compounds is sensitive only to syntactic branching-it
is unaware that union is a polysyllabic word and so has a branching word-stress tree.
I will similarly claim that word-stress labeling rules (though not foot-assignment rules)
are sensitive only to foot-level branching. Therefore, labeling cannot depend on whether
a particular rhyme branches or not.'

4.2. Danmascene Colloquial
The stress rule of the Damascus dialect (Cowell (1964); Grotzfeld (1965)) is a good deal
more familiar than the Cairene one. Except for the Cairene-like stressing of superheavy

      11This suggestion is due to Alan Prince.
                                     ON STRESS       AND          SYLLABIFICATION


ultimas, it is identical to the Classical Latin stress rule: accent a heavy penult or the
first syllable of a disyllabic word, otherwise accent the antepenult: 12
     (24) a.      darrast 'I/you (m. sg.) taught', bzt?u'ul 'you (m. sg.) will say'
          b.      fathet 'she opened', madacares'schools', sirib 'he drank'
          c.      darasu 'they studied', madrase 'school', muttahide 'united (f. sg.)'
The final example is a loanword from Classical Arabic with a properly noncolloquial
surface canonical pattern. It confirms the impossibility of retracting stress beyond the
antepenult under any conditions.
     Damascene is clearly subject to the same syllabification and labeling rules as
Cairene. The real difference between Damascene and Cairene is foot construction. The
Damascene stress rule, like that of Classical Latin, requires an equivalence between a
heavy penult and an antepenult plus light penult. To see this formally, consider the
rhyme projections of the crucial canonical patterns (abstracting away from the weight
of the final syllable):
     (25) a.      heavy penult

                                                s             w

                                                 I            I
                                                nI            n2         n3    #
            b.    light penult and light
                  antepenult                    n1       h2        fi3

            c.    light penult and
                  heavy antepenult

                                                1             1
                                                nI            n2         h3    h4    #

Suppose we then create a left-branching tree with the structure [[n1 n2] n3]. This will
yield the trees of (26), which, with subsequent assignment of right-branching word
structure and labeling as in Cairene, give the correct stress:
(26) a.                            b.                                         c.




           n1      n2         n3         n1         n2               n3             n,   n2   n3   n4

      12
         This generalization has several morphological exceptions, most of which are handled by mechanisms
similar to rule (11). For some discussion of these and possible cyclic metrical stressing in Damascene, see
McCarthy (forthcoming).
460                                       JOHN    J. MCCARTHY


The common property of these trees is that n, and n2are terminalnodes and therefore
nonbranching,while n3 can dominatea heavy or a light syllable.
    The Damascene foot-assignmentrule is expressed formallyas (27):
      (27) [[n1 n2] n3], where n1and n2 do not branch.
I furtherstipulatethat (27) applies from right to left, which will ensure in all cases that
stress never recedes past the antepenult. The bracketingin (27) is interpretedas con-
structinga left-branchingtree while preservingand using any preexistingmetricalstruc-
ture. In practice, if n1 and n2 are already sisters, then n3 is right-adjoinedto them. If
they are not already sisters, then the full left-branchingstructureis created. (27) cannot
destroy structurethat was present before it applied.
     There is a reason why both the Cairene and Damascene rules refer to nodes that
do not branch. A nonbranchingnode in a projection of the rhyme is much like the
Pragueschool mora. The real difference is that, while the mora was defined somewhat
arbitrarilyon a language-by-languagebasis, the equivalentnotion in the metricaltheory
ties into a whole complex of formal properties of syllabification and accentuation.
Furthermore,the metricaltheory provides a naturalaccount of stress rules that clearly
do not count moras, like the following one.

4.3. Classical Arabic
The stress phenomenaof Classical Arabic have a somewhat difficultprovenience. The
native orthoepists said nothing about stress in their usually detailed descriptions. Con-
sequently, in most areas the colloquial stress rule is applied to Classical Arabic, as in
Cairo. Chiefly for this reason, it is widely believed that Classical Arabichad no regular
word stress (Birkeland (1954); Rabin (1978); Ferguson (1956)). But there is a stress
pattern-the same one described in handbooks like Wright(1971)-that is traditionally
observed in some areas despite the dialectal pronunciation.For instance, Abul-Fadl
(1961) reports the following accentuation of Classical Arabic in an area where the
Cairene and Damascene stress rules generally apply to the colloquial:
      (28) kita'abun'book (nom. sg.)', manaadiilu 'kerchiefs (nom.)', yusaariku 'he
           participates',mamlakatun'kingdom(nom. sg.)', kataba'he wrote', balahatun
           'date (nom. sg.)'
The rule usually formulatedto account for these facts is (29):
      (29) a.         Stress a superheavyultima.13
           b.         Otherwise stress the rightmostnonfinalheavy syllable.
           c.         Otherwise stress the first syllable.
In addition to the observance of (29) in some modern traditions, there are two other

      13
           Syllables of this type are limited to so-called pausal forms that occur before major syntactic breaks.
                                ON STRESS   AND   SYLLABIFICATION


arguments for this rule in Classical Arabic. First, it has been retained in a few modern
colloquials like the Egyptian Saiiidi (Khalafallah (1969)) and Yemen Plateau (Diem
(1973)) dialects. Second, there is some basis for inferring stress patterns from the system
of rhyming in verse or rhymed prose (saj?S). For instance, the difference between
masculine and feminine rhymes in English or Modern Hebrew is just the difference
between end-stressed and penult- or antepenult-stressedwords. The Arab orthoepists
recognized an elaborate typology of Classical Arabic rhyming. One type involves su-
perheavy final syllables, anotherheavy penults, on througha heavy syllable that is the
fifth back from the end of the word. In terms of (29), then, the rhyme in verse is just
the string that includes the stressed vowel rightwardto the end of the word.
     So the Classical Arabic stress rule has one of the propertiesof the Damascenerule:
it will not skip over heavy syllables. But Classical Arabic allows retractionof stress a
potentially infinite distance from the right boundary,ratherthan the maximumof three
syllables permittedin Damascene. This means that the Classical Arabic foot must also
be of potentiallyinfinite size. In all other respects it is like Damascene:
    (30)   [[[ . . . [n, n2] . . . ]ni_1] ni], where n1, . . ., ni-1 do not branch and ni is
           maximal.

This infinite schema, along with the stipulation that the foot be as large as possible, is
all that separates Classical Arabic from Damascene. As in Damascene, feet are applied
from the right, word structure is right-branching, and labeling follows (8c).

5. Diachronic Considerations
These evident similarities between the stress rules of Damascene and Classical Arabic
certainly suggest an historical connection. In previous work, the issue has been clouded
somewhat by the view that Classical Arabic was without word stress. So Cowan (1960),
for instance, holds that the ancient ancestor of the modern dialects was without regular
stress, and that the modern eastern stress patterns arose independently. My view is
closer to the more traditional one of Brockelmann ((1961, originally published in 1907);
more recently Janssens (1972)) that the phenomena in all the modern dialects should be
related historically to a rule like (29). Apart from (29) I attribute no properties to a
protocolloquial Arabic (Ferguson (1978)) that is distinct from Classical Arabic.
     In the metrical analysis of Arabic stress that has been proposed here, the sole
difference between Classical Arabic and Damascene Arabic is that the former has
potentially infinite feet while the latter has reduced the foot to three nodes subject to
the same conditions on branching. In fact, except for a few scattered dialects, no modern
colloquial has feet of the indefinite-sized, Classical Arabic type. Now notice that this
distinction seems to correlate with the existence of extensive vowel reduction (deletion
of unstressed vowels in open syllables, sometimes restricted to nonlow vowels) in the
same colloquials. If vowel reduction is-at least in its initial phonetic development-a
reflex of stress timing, then we can see that the colloquials must be stress timed, while
462                                    JOHN    J. MCCARTHY


 Classical Arabic was not. Stress timing in a metrical theory can be understood as just
 timing of the duration of feet. If the feet are limited to two or three syllables, as in the
 colloquials, they can be easily, though not necessarily, stress timed. This is clearly not
 the case with the Classical feet. Potentially infinite feet are presumably unmanageable
 for a stress timing rule.
      Probably the Damascene foot is the most common Arabic type: it seems to hold for
 much of the Levant and may also be prevalent in the western dialects, like Maltese
 (Brame (1973)). So apparently this reduction of the original potentially infinite schema
 to a fixed one with three terms was a fairly early development. But in Cairene we have
just a two-term schema, where both nodes are nonbranching. My suggestion is that
 Cairene simply displays the loss of that third term n3 from the rule schema, a formal
 historical rule simplification.
      Unfortunately, Cairene presents one other historical problem that remains intract-
 able. Feet must be assigned from left to right in Cairene but from right to left in the
 other colloquials and in Classical Arabic. This change in direction is entirely unexplained
 under the account offered here. The ideal explanation would be to posit a relationship
 between the form of the foot and the direction of its application, so the change in
 direction in Cairene would be automatic. Although no complete solution is forthcoming,
 some new evidence bearing on this question suggests that the form of the feet does
 partially or fully determine the direction of their assignment.
      It is generally agreed (Sturtevant (1940)) that preclassical Latin was prototone:
 stress the initial syllable. The Classical Latin stress rule was like the Damascene rule
 we have already seen. In the paragraphs that follow are some conjectures toward
 explaining this historical change.
      The only evidence of any intermediate historical stage comes from early Latin
verse, where the correlation of metrical ictus and accent is supposed to show the
position of stress (Fraenkel (1928)). In this material, quadrisyllabic words with the first
three syllables light were often accented as in earlier Latin fdcilius, sometimes as in
 Classical facdlius, and rarely, though interestingly, facilius (particularly before major
constituent breaks). Trisyllabic words with heavy first and light second syllable are
usually stressed like c6rpore in this verse, as in prehistoric and Classical Latin. But
again, some examples occur before syntactic breaks with the accentual type corpore.14
      The evidence of ictus is apparently not sufficient to determine whether the acute
marks primary or secondary stress in facilius and corpore. What is significant is that
these two types are identical in effect to the Cairene stress rule. So in addition to initial
stress, preclassical Latin apparently had a left-to-right foot assignment just like Cairene.
      For reasons that I do not understand, the Latin foot was expanded historically from
the Cairene to the Damascene type. To the point at issue, this change in feet seems to
have automatically induced a change in the direction of foot assignment. It seems likely

       14
          For a discussion of these facts with a view toward explaining the retarded stress shift in forms like
f6cilius, see Allen (1973).
                                  ON STRESS    AND   SYLLABIFICATION


that left-branchingfeet, as in Damascene or Classical Latin, requireright-to-leftappli-
cation in some way that this formalismfails to capture. Symmetrically,a foot which
explicitly does not branch on the left, as in Cairene, may allow the opposite direction
of application. Historically, the change in the Latin foot from binary to left-branching
ternaryrequireda shift to right-to-leftapplication.The change in Cairenefrom ternary
to binary feet at least allowed and may even have required a shift to left-to-right
application. In short, these two languages had opposite historical accentual develop-
ments.

6. Conclusion
The model of metricalsyllabificationpresented here was chiefly justified by its success
in accounting for a wide variety of accentual phenomena. It raises some new issues as
well. First, there is the question of universalconstraintson the form of foot-assignment
rules. We have seen that several different nodes of the foot can be stipulated as
nonbranchingor freely branchingin different languages. We have also seen feet with
two, three, and an unboundednumber of nodes. Some efforts toward restrictingthe
geometrical possibilities for feet are made in McCarthy(1979). Second, the theory
predicts strong correlations between syllable weight and other phenomena. In partic-
ular, it says that the hierarchicalunits motivated at differentlevels by accentual facts
ought to function in many other phonologicalrules as well. It remainsto integratethese
structuresfully into the segmentalphonology.

References
Abul-Fadl, F. (1961) Volkstiimliclie Texte in arabischen Ba,ierndialekten der dgyptischlienProi'inz
       Sarqivva, Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat, Muinster(Westf.).
Allen, W. S. (1973) Accent and Rh1ytlhm,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Anderson, S. R. (1974) The OrganiZation of Plhonology, Academic Press, New York.
Birkeland, H. (1954) Stress Patterns in Arabic, Avhandlinger utgitt av det Norske Videnskaps-
       Akademi i Oslo II, Hist.-Filos. Klasse, 3, Jacob Dybwad, Oslo.
Brame, M. K. (1971) "Stress in Arabic and Generative Phonology," Foltndations of Laniguiage
       7, 556-591.
Brame, M. K. (1973) "On Stress Assignment in Two Arabic Dialects," in S. Anderson and P.
       Kiparsky, eds., A Festsclhrift for Morris Halle, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Brockelmann, C. (1961) Gruindriss der ilergleichenden Grammatik der semitischen Sprachen I,
       Georg Olm, Hildesheim.
Broselow, E. J. (1976) The Plhonology of Egyptian Arabic, Doctoral dissertation, University of
       Massachusetts at Amherst, Massachusetts.
Chomsky, N. and M. Halle (1968) The Solund Pattern of Englislh, Harper and Row, New York.
Cowan, W. G. (1960) A Reconstriction of Proto-colloquuialArabic, Doctoral dissertation, Cornell
       University, Ithaca, New York.
Cowell, M. W. (1964) A Reference Grammar of Syrian Arabic, Georgetown University Press,
       Washington, D.C.
de Chene, B. (1977) "Syllable and Mora in Verse and Accentuation," unpublished paper, UCLA,
       Los Angeles, California.
464                               JOHN   J. MCCARTHY


Diem, W. (1973) Skizzen jemenitisclier Dialekte, in Kommission bei Franz Steiner Verlag, Wies-
       baden.
Dixon, R. M. (1977) "Some Phonological Rules in Yidiny," Lingilistic Inqlliry 8, 1-34.
Ferguson, C. A. (1956) Review of Birkeland (1954), Langutage 32, 384-387.
Ferguson, C. A. (1978) "The Arabic Koine," in S. H. Al-Ani, ed., Readings in Arabic Linguistics,
       Indiana University Linguistics Club, Bloomington, Indiana.
Fraenkel, E. (1928) Ik-titslind Akzent im lateinisclhen Spreclhvers, Weidmannsche Buchhandlung,
       Berlin.
Grotzfeld, H. (1965) Syrisch-Arabische Grammatik, Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.
Haas, M. (1977) "Tonal Accent in Creek [Muskogee]," in L. M. Hyman, ed. (1977b).
Harrell, R. S. (1957) Tlle Plhonology of Colloqiuial Egyptian Arabic, American Council of Learned
       Societies, New York.
Harrell, R. S. (1960) "A Linguistic Analysis of Egyptian Radio Arabic," in C. A. Ferguson, ed.,
       Contributtionsto Arabic Linguistics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hyman, L. M. (1977a) "*Onthe Nature of Linguistic Stress," in L. M. Hyman, ed. (1977b).
Hyman, L. M., ed. (1977b) Stludies in Stress and Accent, Southern California Occasional Papers
       in Linguistics 4, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
Jakobson, R. (1971a) "Die Betonung und ihre Rolle in der Wort- und Syntagmaphonologie," in
       R. Jakobson (1971d).
Jakobson, R. (1971b) "Uber die Beschaffenheit der prosodischen Gegensatze," in R. Jakobson
       (1971d).
Jakobson, R. (1971c) "On Ancient Greek Prosody," in R. Jakobson (1971d).
Jakobson, R. (1971d) Selected Writings I, Mouton, The Hague.
Janssens, G. (1972) Stress in Arabic and Word Struictutrein the Modern Arabic Dialects, Orientalia
       Gandensia V, Peeters, Louvain.
Kahn, D. (1976) Syllable-based Generalizations in Englislh Phonology, Doctoral dissertation,
       MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Khalafallah, A. A. (1969) A Descriptive Grammar of Sa9i:di Egyptian Colloquiial Arabic, Mouton,
       The Hague.
Kiparsky, P. and M. Halle (1977) "iTowarda Reconstruction of the Indo-European Accent," in
       L. M. Hyman, ed. (1977b).
Kussaim, S. (1968) "*L'accentde mot dans I'arabe du Caire," Arabica 15, 289-315.
Langendoen, D. T. (1968) The London School of Linguistics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachu-
       setts.
Lecerf, J. (1974) "*L'accentde mot en Arabe d'orient," in A. Caquot and D. Cohen, eds., Actes
       dio premier congres international de lingiuistiqle semitiquueet chamito-semitiqlue, Mouton,
       The Hague.
Liberman, M. and A. Prince (1977) "On Stress and Linguistic Rhythm," Linguistic Inqlliry 8,
       249-336.
McCarthy, J. (1977) "CT," in J. A. Kegl, D. Nash, and A. Zaenen, eds., Proceedings of thie
       Seventh Annutal Meeting of tlie Nortlh Eastern Linguistic Society, MIT, Cambridge, Mas-
       sachusetts.
McCarthy, J. (forthcoming) Formal Problems in Semitic Phonology and Morphology, Doctoral
       dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts. [Has appeared as McCarthy (1979) since
       this article went to press. Ed.]
Mitchell, T. F. (1975) Principles of Firtliian Linguistics, Longman's, London.
Prince, A. S. (1975) The Phionology and Morphiology of Tiberian Hebrew, Doctoral dissertation,
       MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
                                  ON STRESS    AND   SYLLABIFICATION


Rabin, Ch. (1978) "The Beginnings of Classical Arabic," in S. H. Al-Ani, ed., Readings in Arabic
       Linguiistics, Indiana University Linguistics Club, Bloomington, Indiana.
Sapir, E. (1930) Soiitliern Pailite, a Shloslionean Langluage, Proceedings of the American Acad-
       emy of Arts and Sciences 65, 1-3.
Stetson, R. H. (1951) Motor Phlonetics, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Sturtevant, E. H. (1940) The Pronuinciation of Greek and Latin, Linguistic Society of America,
       Philadelphia.
Tomiche, N. (1964) Le parler arabe dii Caire, Mouton, The Hague.
Trubetzkoy, N. S. (1969) Principles of Phlonology, University of California Press, Berkeley,
       California.
Vergnaud, J.-R. (ms.) Formal Plhonology.
Welden, E. A. (1977) Prosodic Aspects of Cairo Arabic Plhonology, Doctoral dissertation, Uni-
       versity of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Wright, W. (1971) A Grammar of 'tle Arabic Langilage, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Department of Linguistics and Plhilosoplhy
20C-128
MIT
Cambridlge, Massaclhiusetts 02139
