
Nisba (onomastics)
Element in Arabic names

This article needs more citations. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Nisba" onomastics – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (January 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

In Arabic names, a nisba (Arabic: نسبة nisbah, "attribution"), also rendered as nesba or nesbat, is an adjective surname indicating the person's place of origin, ancestral tribe, or ancestry, used at the end of the surname. Examples of this suffix included at the end of a surname include: -at (eg: Obeidat), -i (eg: Al Masri), -awi (eg: Badawi), -iyy for masculine and -iyyah for feminine.[1]

Nisba, originally an Arabic word, has been passed to many other languages such as Turkish, Persian, Bengali, Hindi and Urdu.

In Persian and Turkish, it is always pronounced and written as nisbat. In Arabic usage, that pronunciation occurs when the word is uttered in its construct state only.

Original use

Main article: Arabic nouns and adjectives § nisba

A nisba "relation" is a grammatical term referring to the suffixation of masculine -iyy, feminine -iyyah to a word to make it an adjective. As an example, the word ‘Arabiyy (عربي) means "Arab, related to Arabic, Arabian". Nisba forms are very common in Arabic names.

Use in onomastics

Traditional Arabic names are patronymics (nasab), where the full name of the person is followed by the name of his father, usually linked by ibn or bin ('son').  Patronymics may be long as they may include all known forefathers.  When a name is simplified to one or two ancestors, it may become confusing to distinguish from other similar names; in such cases, the nisba may be added as an additional specifier.

A nisba is usually prefixed by the definite article 'al-' and can take a number of forms:

Places

Al-Afghani, related to or from Afghanistan

Al-Albani, related to or from Albania e.g. Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani.

Al-Almani, related to or from Germany

Al-Amriki, related to or from America

Al-Andalusi, related to or from the region of Al-Andalus (modern day Iberia) e.g. Said al-Andalusi, Abū ʿAbdallāh Yaʿīsh ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Yūsuf ibn Simāk al-Andalusī al-Umawī

Al-Armani, related to or from Greater Armenia or Armenians

al-Astarabadi, from Astarabad (modern Gorgan), Persia

al-Baghdadi, related to or from the city of Baghdad, e.g. Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Junayd al-Baghdadi.

al-Bakkaniy, from the Royal Town of Pekan in the state of Pahang in Malaysia, Mohammad Faeez Harith al-Bakkaniy

al-Bangali, from the region of Bengal or a Bengali descent (mainly from Bangladesh)

al-Bantani, from the province of Banten in Indonesia e.g. Syeikh Abdur Rauf al-Bantani

al-Basri, from Basra, e.g. Ibn Sa'd

al-Britani, related to or from the United Kingdom

al-Busnawi, related to or from Bosnia, e.g. Matrakçı Nasuh al-Busnawi.

al-Buthuni, from the island of Buton in Indonesia e.g. Haji Abdul Ghaniu al-Buthuni

al-Daylami, from Daylam, northern Iran

al-Dahlawi, from Delhi, India

al-Dimashqi, related to or from the city of Damascus e.g. Al-Dimashqi (geographer), Abu al-Fadl Ja'far ibn 'Ali al-Dimashqi

al-Falembani, from a capital city in the province of South Sumatera in Indonesia, e.g. Abdul Samad Al-Falimbani

al-Fansuri, from the town of Pancur in the Central Tapanuli Regency in North Sumatera Indonesia e.g. Hamzah al-Fansuri

al-Farsi, related to or from the region of Pars (Fars) or the country of Persia; e.g. Salman al-Farsi, Saud Al-Farsi

al-Fatani, from the province of Pattani in Thailand e.g. Syeikh Daud al-Fatani

al-Filfulani, from the state of Penang in Malaysia e.g. Syeikh Zubeir al-Filfulani

al-Filisṭīnī, related to or from the region of Palestine e.g. Abu Qatada al-Filistini.

al-Ghari, Literally means cave in Arabic. From the district of Gua Musang (literally meaning Fox Cave in Malay) in the state of Kelantan in Malaysia, e.g. Zamihan al-Ghari

al-Hadrami, related to or from the region of Hadhramaut e.g. Al-Ala al-Hadhrami, Ahmed Al-Hadrami, Imam al-Hadrami.

al-Hamadani, from Hamadan, Persia

al-Hijazi, related to or from the region of Hijaz e.g. Amal Hijazi, Farouk Hijazi, Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi

al-Himsi, related to or from the city of Homs e.g. Qustaki al-Himsi, Ibn Na'ima al-Himsi.

al-Harari related to or from the city of Harar

al-Iraqi, related to or from the country of Iraq e.g. Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi, Abdul Hadi al Iraqi, Abu Ayoub al-Iraqi

al-Isfahani – from Isfahan, Persia

al-Jaza'iri, related to or from the country of Algeria e.g. Emir Abdelkader al-Jaza'iri, Abu Bakr al-Jaza'iri

al-Jannabi, from Jannaba port city, Arrajan province of Persia

al-Johori, from the state of Johor in Malaysia e.g. Ahmad bin Ya'kob al-Johori

al-Jurjani, from Jurjan

al-Juzjani, from Juzjan

al-Kairouani, related to or from the city of Kairouan in Tunisia.

al-Kalantani, from the state of Kelantan in Malaysia e.g. Syeikh Ismail bin Abdul Majid al-Kalantani, Syeikh Wan Ali bin Abdul Rahman al-Kalantani

al-Kedahi, from the state of Kedah in Malaysia e.g. Syeikh Mahmud al-Kedahi

al-Khwarizmi, related to or from the region of Khwarazm, e.g. Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi.

al-Kuwaiti, related to or from the country of Kuwait e.g. Abu Omar al-Kuwaiti, Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti, Jandal al-Kuwaiti.

Lahori, related to or from the city of Lahore, in Punjab, Pakistan e.g. Ustad Ahmad Lahori

al-Lubnani, related to or from the country of Lebanon e.g. Bilal al-Berjawi al-Lubnani.

al-Lusunji, from Losong, in Kuala Terengganu, Malaysia, e.g. Afif al-Lusunji

al-Maghrebi, related to or from the region of Maghreb e.g. Ibn Yaḥyā al-Maghribī al-Samawʾal, Mahmud Sulayman al-Maghribi, Yusuf al-Maghribi.

al-Maqassari from the city of Makassar in Indonesia e.g. Muhammad Yusuf al-Maqassari

al-Masri, related to or from Egypt. e.g. Taher al-Masri, Abu Hamza al-Masri.

al-Nahawandi, al-Nihawandi, from Nahavand, Iran

al-Najdi, related to or from the region of Najd in Saudi Arabia e.g. Qutaybah al-Najdi

al-Nisaburi, al-Naysaburi, from Nishapur, Iran

al-Qazwini, from Qazvin

al-Quhistani, from Quhistan

al-Qumisi, al-Kumisi, from Qumis, Iran

al-Razi, from Ray, Iran

al-Rûmi, from Rome

al-Shami, related to or from the region of Levant or from the country of Syria e.g. Nasser al-Shami, Husayn al-Shami, Abu Anas al-Shami, Abu Humam al-Shami.

al-Shinqiti, related to or from the city of Chinguetti or Bilād Šinqīṭ (Bilad Chinguetti, modern-day Mauritania) e.g. Ahmad ibn al-Amin al-Shinqiti

al-Shirazi, from Shiraz, Fars, Persia

al-Sindhi, related to or from the region of Sindh e.g. Mohammad Hayyat al-Sindhi

al-Sinkili, from the town of Singkel in the province of Aceh in Indonesia Abd al-Rauf ibn Ali al-Fansuri al-Sinkili

al-Sistani, al-Sijistani, al-Sajistani, al-Sijzi, from Sistan, Persia or Greater Iran

al-Tabari, from Tabaristan, Persia

al-Tantawi, from Tanta, Egypt, e.g. Nasrudin Hasan Tantawi

al-Tiflisi, from Tiflis (Tbilisi), Georgia

al-Tihami, related to or from the region of Tihamah in Saudi Arabia.

al-Tikriti, related to or from the city of Tikrit, e.g. Saddam Hussein Abd al-Majid al-Tikriti, Abu Raita al-Takriti, Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti

al-Tunisi, related to or from the country of Tunisia e.g. Abu Nasr al-Tunisi, Abu Osama al-Tunisi, Ali ibn Ziyad at-Tarabulsi al-Tunisi al-'Absi, Nabilah al-Tunisi

al-Turki, related to or from the country of Turkey e.g. Abu Yusuf Al-Turki, Azjur al-Turki, Hassan Abdullah Hersi al-Turki, Hussain Al-Turki

al-Tusi, from Tus, Khurasan, Persia

al-Yemeni, related to or from the country of Yemen

al-Yrifani, related to or from Yerevan

al-Zayla'i, related to or from Zeila region and Zeila town in Horn of Africa e.g. Abd Al-Rahman al-Zayla'i

ar-Raniri, from the town of Rander, in Surat district in the state of Gujarat, India. e.g. Nuruddin ar-Raniri

as-Sambasi, from the regency of Sambas in Indonesia e.g. Muhammad Jabir as-Sambasi

as-Sarawaki, from the state of Sarawak in Malaysia, e.g. Muhtar Suhaili As-Sarawaki

as-Sembilani, from the state of Negeri Sembilan in Malaysia, e.g. Muhammad Musa al-Hafiz as-Sembilani

as-Subanji, from the city of Subang Jaya in the state of Selangor in Malaysia e.g. Kamarul Afiq as-Subanji

as-Sumatrani, from the island of Sumatera in Indonesia e.g. Syeikh Syamsuddin as-Sumatrani

as-Sumbawi, from the island of Sumbawa in Indonesia Syeikh Muhammad Zainuddin as-Sumbawi

at-Tranjanuwi, from the state of Terengganu in Malaysia e.g. Iskandar at-Tranjanuwi

al Bukhari, from Bukhara, Uzbekistan

al-Darbandi, Darbandi, from Derbent, Persia

El Djezairi, related to or from Algeria e.g. Abdelkader El Djezairi.

Faridi, related to or from the region of Greater Faridpur in Bangladesh e.g. Abdul Haque Faridi

al-Khurasani, from Khurasan e.g. Abu Muslim, Abdallah ibn Tahir al-Khurasani

Islamabadi, related to or from the city of Chittagong (previously known as Islamabad) e.g. Maniruzzaman Islamabadi

Maneri, from Maner Sharif, India, e.g. Makhdoom Yahya Maneri.

al-Marwazi, from Marw, Khurasan

al-Rûmi, from Rûm (The Balkans and Asia Minor)

Siraji, related to or from the district of Sirajganj in Bangladesh e.g. Ismail Hossain Siraji

Tribes, clans or families

al-Tamimi, from the tribe or clan of Bani Tamim. e.g. Modher Sadeq-Saba al-Tamimi, Talib al-Suhail al-Tamimi, Alaa al-Tamimi.

al-Qurashi, from the tribe or clan of Quraish. e.g. ibn Kathir al-Qurashi, Abû 'Uthmân Sa'îd ibn Hakam al Qurashi.

Al-Hashemi, from the clan of Banu Hashim. Members of the Hashemite dynasty are referred to with the nisba "Al-Hashemi".

at-Ta'i, from the tribe of Tai'. e.g. Hatem at-Ta'i.

al-Ishaaqi, from the tribe or clan of Ishaaq in Somaliland

al-Banjari, from the people of Banjar ethnicity in Indonesia e.g. Muhammad Arsyad bin Abdullah al-Banjari

al-Minankabawi - from the people of Minangkabau ethnicity in Indonesia e.g. Syeikh Ahmad Khatib al-Minankabawi, Syeikh Ismail Khalidi al-Minankabawi

al-Mandaili - from the people of Mandailing ethnicity in Indonesia e.g. Haji Abdur Rahman al-Mandaili

al-Rawi - from the people of Rawa ethnicity in Indonesia e.g. Tengku Limbang Laut al-Rawi

People

al-Maliki, related to Malik al-Ashtar. e.g. Nouri al-Maliki

al-Faruqi, related to Faruq the Great. e.g. Ismail al-Faruqi

Faith

al-Nasiri, with nasiri meaning "Christian", more literally: "Nazarene"

al-Majusi, with majus meaning "Zoroastrian"

al-Falaki, with falak meaning "astronomy" e.g. Syeikh Tahir Jalaluddin al-Falaki

Multiples

One can have more than one nisba, one can be related to a city, a clan, a profession and a person at the same time. Examples include:

Ali ibn Abi Hazm al-Qarshi al-Dimashqi, from the tribe of Quraish and from Damascus (Dimashq).

Abd al-Qahir ibn Tahir al-Tamimi al-Shafi`i al-Baghdadi, from the tribe of Bani Tamim, from the city of Baghdad and a follower of Muhammad ibn Idris ash-Shafi`i.

Makhdoom Yahya Maneri al-Suharwardi al-Hashimi al-Muttalabi, from the town of Maner Sharif, of the Sufi order Suhrawardiyya, of the tribe Banu Hashim and clan of Abd al-Muttalib.

The nisba is optional but is quite widespread.

Examples

Ansari — from Ansar, the people of Medina who helped Muhammad

Hanbali — someone following Ahmad ibn Hanbal's school of Islamic jurisprudence

Isma'ili — those who accepted Isma'il ibn Ja'far as the rightful Imam

Zayla'i — someone from the historical port town of Zeila

See also

Arabic name

Kunya (Arabic)

Patrial name – Variety of surname

Ó and Mac

Takhallus - a nom de plume conventionally adopted by Islamic poets

References

↑ Sublet, Jacqueline (1995). "Nisba". In Bosworth, C. E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W. P. & Lecomte, G. (eds.). The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Volume VIII: Ned–Sam. Leiden: E. J. Brill. doi:10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0866. ISBN 978-90-04-09834-3.

