                          Studia Linguistica Universitatis Iagellonicae Cracoviensis 131 (2014): 335–351
                                                                      doi:10.4467/20834624SL.14.020.2727
                                                                  www.ejournals.eu/Studia-Linguistica




ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA
Pedagogical University of Cracow
abuczekzawila@gmail.com




                     EVERYTHING MUST HAVE ITS PLACE:
                          ACCENT ACCOMMODATION IN
             MODERN WELSH BORROWINGS FROM ENGLISH

Keywords: Welsh, word-stress, Loan phonology, adaptation


Abstract
Wales has been in contact with English since as early as the 12th century, with the
English language exerting regular influence on the indigenous Welsh-language com-
munity since the 14th century. Since the earlier times of contact the two languages have
interacted, mutually influencing each other to a differing and asymmetrical degree.
The situation is that of widespread bilingualism, with everyday occurrences of natural
code-switching between Welsh and English, as well as constant interaction and mu-
tual influence of one language on the other, most notably in the form of borrowing and
substratum patterns, not restricted to the area of the lexical stock. Within the lexical
sphere, however, there is evidence that borrowing from English must have begun as
early as the Old English period; and that the process is in full force today. The older
borrowings are not straightforwardly so noticeable or recognisable since they have
undergone substantial phonological modification and adaptation to the native system.
One of these modifications has concerned the suprasegmental feature of word stress.
The adaptation of Anglicisms at the segmental level has been investigated before, while
the accent accommodation to the Welsh pattern has only occasionally been noticed or
commented upon. And yet, since there exists a systemic difference between the two
phonological systems in that in English the word-accent is quantity sensitive, whereas
in Welsh it is fixed (mostly) to the penultimate syllable, one can expect a considerable
amount of conflicting points and necessary adjustments to eliminate illicit metrical
structure. The research into these issues appears to suggest that we cannot talk about
mechanical inclusion of borrowed words into the word-stress pattern functioning in
Modern Welsh, as will hopefully become clear after examination of the data set. It is to
such issues that this paper is going to be devoted.
336                                                                      ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


0. Introduction

Various types of emergent patterns are observed in loanword phonological adap-
tation (Kang 2011), yet not much research so far has focused on the tendencies in
suprasegmental adjustments. This paper is an attempt to partially fill this gap by
investigating certain more or less universal preferences for adjusting loans in terms
of (word) stress assignment.
    As succinctly expressed by Phillips (2007: 168), present-day spoken Welsh is
changing quickly, with several (cross-linguistically) salient features becoming re-
cessive in the spoken language of the present day:
   A closer look at Welsh, though, reveals grounds for concern: the language is changing,
   becoming more like the English in which almost all Welsh speakers are now fluent. Lexi-
   cal borrowing, calquing, perhaps incipient metatypy, mean that the language of many
   younger speakers is very different to that of the oldest generation. (Phillips 2007: 154)

This, obviously, is hardly a trend confined to the situation of Welsh speakers. Geo-
graphical proximity to England and the fact that English is the language of daily
communication for many Welshmen, provide continual occasions for contact situa-
tions to occur. The result of these will be linguistic interference which may manifest
itself in a number of ways, not the most infrequent of these being lexical interference,
i.e. borrowing.
    The most general definition of linguistic borrowing or interference is the ex-
change of linguistic material between two varieties of speech, mainly two languages.
Therefore, “loanwords” are items borrowed from one language to another, which,
on the way from the donor language (DL) to the borrowing language (BL), undergo
a series of adaptation processes to make them conform to the grammar of the host
language. Thus, in the recipient language new items or patterns are introduced, such
as previously have been attested only in the source system. As pointed out by Fisiak
(1962: 286; after Haugen 1950), such novel formations may be taken over without
any changes, in which case we deal with importations, or, alternatively, they may
become nativised (or adapted) on several levels and thus we talk about substitutions.
In the phonology, it means observing the structural constraints relating to all facets
of phonological structure, and thus reflecting the segmental, phonotactic, supraseg-
mental and the morphophonological restrictions of the borrower.
     Calabrese (2009: 66–67) explains the idea more specifically, discussing two
prevailing possibilities that present themselves when the conditions under which
linguistic borrowing occurs lead to the formation of loanwords:
   Assume two languages L1 and L2. L1 is the borrowing language and L2 the loaning
   language. Borrowing occurs when a speaker of L1 “borrows” a word of L2 to fill
   a lexical gap in L1. The reasons for this lexical gap can be many: lexical or cultural
   innovation may introduce objects or actions that do not have a name in L1; certain
   words may be felt as non-prestigious; certain words may simply be unknown, or just
   forgotten; new words may be created for playing, etc. In any case, there are two pos-
   sible scenarios in which borrowing occurs:
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                                   337

   I: A speaker is bilingual in L1 and L2. A lexical gap in L1 is filled in by taking a word
       from L2. The speaker retrieves the underlying representation of this word from
       his L2 mental dictionary […] and generates its surface representation while
       speaking in L1. If the surface representation of the word is generated by using
       the phonological, or more generally the grammatical, system of L2, the word is
       pronounced as in L2. There are no adjustments or adaptations. However, if the
       surface representation of the word is generated by using the phonological, or more
       generally the grammatical, system of L1, the word undergoes adaptations and
       adjustments. It is nativized according to the L1 grammar […].
   II: The speaker of L1 does not know L2 well. He fills a lexical gap in L1 by learning the
       relevant word from a L2 speaker. Once the learned word will be uttered publicly
       or even silently, it becomes a loanword. Given that the speaker does not speak L2
       well, the word will display adjustments and adaptations. There are two possible
       hypotheses to account for this. The first is that during perception and learning,
       the acoustic of the nonnative segments is faithfully mapped into abstract featural
       representations […] then modified during production. The second is that the
       modifications already occur during perception and learning.


1. Phonological adaptation of borrowings
From the very beginning of cross-linguistic studies, some authors have tried to
sketch valid classifications for borrowing and interference. Some have come up with
some fairly interesting proposals. One of the types involves classifications accord-
ing to the level or sub-system of the target/receiving language affected by a given
fact of interference (Gomez Capuz 1997: 82–83). Thus, Clyne (in Gomez Capuz 1997)
proposes a typological classification of interference and distinguishes eight cat-
egories in relation to the eight levels of any given linguistic system: phonological
borrowing, prosodic borrowing, graphematic borrowing, morphemic borrowing
(transference of bound morphemes), morphological borrowing (transference of
morphological patterns), semantic borrowing (transference of sememes), lexical bor-
rowing (transference of lexemes), and syntactic borrowing (transference of syntactic
rules) (Gomez Capuz 1997: 83). Among these, phonetic or graphic phenomena are
to be subordinated to “lexical borrowing” when they are found within loanwords.
Independently, formal phonological borrowings originate following well-known
features of a prestigious foreign language, usually English, in a third language, e.g.
the pronunciation of lexical units from the Latin sine die is turned into [sain dai]
by way of French broadcasting.
    Several factors are at play when adaptation of borrowings from the donor to the
host language takes place. The primary one of these is the different grammars that
the two language systems may possess. Adjustments are also dependent on percep-
tion, phonetic and local variation, level of bilingualism, orthography and the degree
of integration. The pivotal variable appears to be the perception of borrowers, who
try to mimic the original phonetic form of the loan. Yip (2006) proposes a model
explaining loanword adaptation:
338                                                                          ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


(1) L2 source → Perceptual module → Non-native percept → L1 grammar → Adapted
    loanword

Thus, the new, adapted phonological shape of the borrowed word depends largely
on the grammar of the borrowing language, to the effect that the phonetic surface
form is adjusted closer to original forms of the host rather than the donor language.
The degree of substitution is also crucially related to the perceived prestige of the
donor language, which, if considered prestigious, demands retaining the near-original
sound structure, with mispronunciations or variant adaptations seen as symptoms
of ignorance or excessive carelessness. Kertész (2006: 14) enumerates a series of
non-phonological or even non-linguistic factors that can influence the processes
of adaptation: the role of “spelling pronunciation” (especially when shifting from
one alphabetic system to another), the frequency of use – how frequently an item
is used or how long it has been around in the language; age groups; the linguistic
environment of a speaker (individual mono- and bilingualism). Finally, she men-
tions paradigm uniformity: sometimes the presence of a foreign feature in an element
can only be explained by the behaviour of another member of its paradigm, which
already contains the given feature (Kertész 2006: 14). This will prove a fruitful way of
looking at some examples from the data set. The general regularity which transpires
from the emergent patterns seems to be that “elements that are not part of the native
core vocabulary (like mimetic words and borrowings) are allowed to violate certain
constraints” (Kertész 2006: 12).
    If indeed the role of perception in loanword phonology is acknowledged, it must
be viewed as closely related to phonetic approximation or similarity between the
outputs of the donor and the recipient languages, consisting in the replacement op-
eration between the non-native element and the native one and defined as “acoustic
proximity or proximity in the sense of fine-grained articulatory gestures” (Calabrese
2009: 69). Consequently, illicit configurations, blocked by active constraints in the
native language grammar, must be adjusted and repaired to produce an acceptable,
nativised representation. At all times, it is doubtless that all aspects of non-native
phonological structure, including segments, prosodic, and syllable phonotactics,
are systematically distorted during speech perception and, therefore, need to be
adjusted to native phonology (Calabrese 2009: 74).
    Since this paper will not investigate all aspects of loanword phonology, let us
concentrate on the pattern which appears to be most relevant to the cases of pro-
sodic adaptation, namely what Kang (2011) refers to as the retreat to the unmarked.1
Loans seem to behave differently according to their degree of integration into the
borrowing language. Thus, in the case of what have been considered well-integrated
loanwords, the L1 (host) grammar takes over nearly completely and consequently,
the borrowings are transformed according to the phonological constraints of L1, with
complete disregard to the items’ original segmental make-up, length of vowels or

1
    Kang enumerates five distinct categories of regular patterns emerging in segmental loanword
    phonology. It is my belief that the fifth category, explained by recourse to UG default settings,
    can be perceived as relevant for borrowed accent accommodation.
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                                      339

consonants or the stress pattern. Thus, loanwords are transformed into an unmarked
form, which in the case of stress assignment is demonstrated by assuming a default
accent assignment pattern, the most general occurring in the language. This may
be at least partially explained, as Kang (2011) argues, not through the influence of
native grammar, but rather by the default setting of Universal Grammar.


2. Stress assignment in loanwords from English – a survey of tendencies

Stress assignment in loanwords has been studied in a number of languages. These
studies generally suggest two possible outcomes for loanword stress assignment
(Friesner 2009: 121):
(2) A. maintenance of stress position from the source language or
    B. adaptation to the unmarked stress position of the recipient language.

In terms of a core-periphery model mentioned earlier, these two possibilities could
be restated as non-adaptation and full adaptation.
    Friesner (2009: 122) points out, however, that even an impressionistic look at the
data from numerous language pairs paints a more complex picture, some examples
constitute neither non-adaptation, nor full adaptation; therefore other possible
intervening factors must be decisive here, such as the presence of secondary stress
in the source form, analogy with other lexical items in the native vocabulary of the
recipient language, or the need for loanwords to adhere to morphological require-
ments of the recipient language. When only Anglicisms are investigated, they appear
to choose one or the other option of (2), at least in the languages of Europe. Görlach
(2004: 6) remarks that where differences in word stress and intonation exist between
English as the donor language and a borrowing language, they are likely to be carried
over, affecting the pronunciation of loans and occasionally leading to phonological
innovations in the borrowing language. A significant factor deciding for or against
retaining the pronunciation close to the original is the age of the loan: in the cases
examined older loans tend to be fully assimilated, while more recent (also more
specialised) loanwords normally retain their (nearly) English pronunciation.
    Before any investigation of the situation pertaining to accentual (non-)adaptation
of items borrowed from English into Welsh is attempted, a brief commentary on the
stress assignment patterns found in both systems is worth recalling.


3. Accentual patterns of English (DL) and Welsh (BL)

Without going into detailed explanations of the category of lexical word-accent,2
let us observe first that the two interacting languages belong to separate typological

2
    See, however, a rather matter-of-fact presentation of these issues in Buczek-Zawiła (2012) and
    works cited there.
340                                                                     ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


groups as far as stress placement is effected: English is a variable stress language
while Welsh is one of many fixed accent languages (Buczek-Zawiła 2012: 76–77).
Apart from that, the two languages differ additionally in the application of phonetic
clues to word stress.


3.1. English variable stress
 Van der Hulst, Hendriks and van de Weijer (1999: 426) describe the accent sys-
 tem for underived words in English in the following fashion: “a quantity-sensitive
 system with bounded, trochaic feet which are assigned from the right word edge,
 final extrametrical syllables, and main accent on the head of the rightmost foot”.
 The quantity-sensitive nature of English stress accent manifests itself in placing the
 stress on the antepenultimate syllable when the penult is open and contains a simple
 vocalic nucleus (a short vowel), whereas the penultimate syllable receives stress if
 it is closed or contains a complex (long) vocalic melody. Stress assignment is then
 sensitive to the weight of syllables within words. In derived words, on the other hand,
 the major distinction bearing significance to accent assignment is the one between
“accent-sensitive” (Class I) and “accent-neutral” (Class II) affixes. Accent-neutral
 formatives do not influence the position of the stem accent, which, occasionally,
 may fall outside the three-syllable window to which it is limited in simple words.
 The rules of accentuation in derived words with accent-sensitive (class I) formatives
 remain the same as those in underived words. In nominal compounds primary ac-
 cent usually falls on the first member (van der Hulst et al. 1999: 427).
     A brief summary of the facts outlined above is offered in van der Hulst (2010: 445):
(3) Approximation of English stress placement
      a. Primary stress falls on the final syllable in nouns if the vowel is long, in verbs
         if the vowel is long or there are two closing consonants.
      b. In other cases, stress falls on the penult if it contains a long vowel or coda.
      c. Otherwise stress is antepenultimate.
      d. Secondary stress falls on alternate syllables to the left (many exceptions).

The phonetic exponents of word accent in English will be discussed in contrast with
the non-corresponding details and facts about Welsh.


3.2. Welsh fixed stress
Almost all Celtic languages have a weight-insensitive stress assignment system: in the
Brythonic group it is assigned from the right word-edge. In Welsh the primary stress
in the clear majority of indigenous polysyllabic words falls normally on the penul-
timate syllable and occasionally on the ultimate, and that happens regardless of the
number of syllables a given word might have (Ball, Williams 2001: 166). Secondary
stress in its turn, being merely the rhythmic prominence, occurs in words of four or
more syllables as well as in trisyllabic ones provided they are end-stressed. A special
feature of Welsh is though that the final syllable, and not the stressed penultimate,
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                                   341

is pronounced with the most prominent pitch movement and with much greater
force (than in English, for instance) (van der Hulst et al. 1999: 445). This inher-
ent high pitch, which is the effect of the post-apocopy accent shift during the Old
Welsh period is also carried over into the Welsh accent of English. Technically, that
involves a high degree of pitch movement on an unaccented post-tonic syllable as
well as a high degree of independence as for pitch in unaccented, pre-tonic positions
(Penhalluric 2004: 115).
    As discussed in Ball and Williams (2001: 171), the higher pitch of the Welsh ultima
has long been noted, even if auditorily at first. They provide a detailed account of
how these auditory impressions have been confirmed instrumentally. It has also
been underlined that not every final syllable is marked by the higher pitch, the
regularity is nonetheless so prevalent that it deserves to be classified as more than
a simple tendency. It is most regular in “the speech that occurs before the nuclear
syllable” (Ball, Williams 2001: 172). A spectrogram shown below3 demonstrates the
higher pitch on the final syllable of the word Morien (as in a phrase Morien Mor­gan
o Aberpennar).




    Fig. 1. A spectrogram of the word Morien (Ball, Williams 2001: 173)

It has also been pointed out that this word pitch prominence occurs as if indepen-
dently of sentence intonation, which is true also when the two, stress and pitch
collocate.
    Ball and Williams (2001: 169) enumerate the typical acoustic phenomena cor-
related with word stress:
(4) Stress involves:
       a. Higher F0 on the stressed syllable
       b. Greater duration of the stressed vowel
       c. Greater loudness of the stressed vowel
       d. More peripheral (less schwa-like) realization of the stressed vowel

3
    The spectrogram originally comes from the relatively recently-collected speech data base of
    Williams, here it follows Ball and Williams (2001: 173).
342                                                               ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


Of these, perceptibly only the vowel loudness can be used as a phonetic cue of
stress in the accented penultima. F0 and stress perception do not seem to be cor-
related in Welsh, and longer duration is not a reliable cue (Williams 1999: 323; Ball,
Williams 2001: 169). An intonational rise or fall cannot be equated with stress –
quite unlike in English. As Williams (1999: 323–324) writes: “A stressed penult may
contain a vowel that is shorter and less intense than the following ultima, but in
which stress is signaled by F0 configuration and segmental cues such as post-stress
consonant lengthening.” This contrasts significantly with English, where the ac-
cented vowel is typically both longer and more intense in comparison to unstressed
syllables in the same word. The F0 peak in English would be a direct cue to stress,
in Welsh, however, the peak is characteristically associated with the final syllable,
giving a somewhat special status (Buczek-Zawiła 2003). Additionally, the situation
becomes even more complex when we take into account the fact that the distribu-
tion of schwa in Welsh does not accord with the distribution of stress: unlike in
English, this vowel may appear in any syllable except for the final, while the stress
accent typically resides in the penultimate. Thus, due to the aforementioned ac-
cent shift, it is possible to find the schwa in the stressed syllable – hence the cue
specified in (4d) is not applicable in this system. All this contributes to a situation
where non-Welsh speakers frequently report their impressions of the final sylla-
ble of words to be the most prominent and most salient (Buczek-Zawiła 2003), as
a function of the characteristic pitch movement – a phenomenon which helps in
resisting vowel reduction (Thomas 1997).
    A number of studies have been devoted to the perception of word stress in Welsh.
Their findings are extensively reported in both Williams (1999) and Ball, Wil-
liams (2001). To summarise, the general claim is that the judgments given by na-
tive speakers as to the location of word stress uniformly indicate the awareness
of the speakers as to the penultimate site of accent, and that is despite sometimes
shorter vowel duration, lower overall amplitude and a change in F0 of less than
10 Hz during the vowel. It has even been remarked that such judgments are a com-
paratively redundant procedure, as stress location in Welsh is fixed (Williams
1999: 313). The situation seems to be different when monoglot English speakers are
taken into considerations, as they probably tend to seek clues for syllable salience
in Welsh that they would expect in English, and that means pitch. Consequently,
studies investigating the perception of Welsh word stress by non-Welsh speakers
report the perceived prominence of the final rather than the penultimate syllable.
    To sum up, then: “In Welsh […] it is the phonetic realization of stress which
is problematic rather than its phonological patterning: there are no phenomena
such as the backshifting seen in English, since stress location is fixed” (Williams
1999: 324).
    All this underlines the difficult situation encountered when novel items are
imported from English and attempts at assimilation in terms of stress accommo-
dation are undertaken by speakers. The most natural locus of lexical stress ought
to be the last but one syllable, with the concomitant higher pitch in the final sylla-
ble. The problem is non-existent in monosyllables where the two elements, termed
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                                     343

“the stress element” and the “pitch element”4 (Ball, Williams 2001: 184) are both
 retained. This becomes evident in those instances of borrowed items which, if they
 do not adjust accentuation to the regular penultimate site, opt for retaining the
 word stress in the final syllable, particularly so if that was the original location of
 stress. In terms of the degree of prominence, even an unstressed final syllable may
 have equal prominence to the accented penultima. Additionally, as pointed out by
Thomas (1997: 72), in Welsh the long vowels are characteristically found only in
 accented syllables, thus if length is preserved in the loan, it will naturally attract
 word-stress. Sometimes, however, as will be illustrated in the section below, it is
 the antepenultimate or even pre-antepenultimate syllable which receives or rather
 retains the accent. This is peculiar indeed, bearing in mind that prosodically these
 are the weakest positions in the word.


4. Stress accommodation in borrowing from English (DL) into Modern Welsh (BL)

Parry-Williams (1923: 11) points out that for a long time there was “a very strong
feeling of prejudice against borrowing indiscriminately, arising probably from a jeal-
ous spirit which in some cases had its origin in the firm belief in the necessity or
desirability of preserving the homogeneity of the Welsh vocabulary.” As he puts it,
Welsh has to be seen as a language which is phonetically conservative,5 thus trying
to maintain its segmental and other phonological properties. And yet, it seems rather
natural that a foreign word that has been borrowed orally from a living language
preserves, as far as possible, its original characteristic sound-value. However, various
influences may be at work, and when the “foreigner” finds himself in Rome, he is
generally obliged to “do as the Romans do”. Segmental trans-phonemicisation aside,
in terms of prosodic features, it is the usual practice to make the word conform to the
standard “rules” of change that are manifest in the borrowing language and which
also comprise older loans. That would call for fixing the position of the stress ac-
cent on the site where indigenous Welsh words have it. Any unusual positions of
accent may bring about changes like the suppression of unaccented (post-tonic
or pre-tonic) vowels (Parry-Williams 1923: 15). The remainder of this paper will try
to examine whether such regularities are substantiated by the data.


4.1. The data set
The data analysed here come from a compilation of Welsh loanwords from English, or
sometimes, those that entered Welsh via English.6 The compilation was prepared
on the basis of several sources, the primary of which was a dictionary study, where

4
    Buczek-Zawiła (2003) proposes here names such as ”prosodic” versus “melodic” stress.
5
    In contrast to English, which had shown a progressive tendency, which is astounding in its
    changes and in the swiftness of them.
6
    See Fisiak (1962) for an elaboration on the role of what he calls complex contact situations.
344                                                                ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


the abnormal position of word stress is marked. The dictionary in question is the
Geiriadur yr Academi: The Welsh Academy English-Welsh Dictionary, edited by
Griffiths and Jones and published by the University of Wales Press in 1995. Addi-
tionally, a survey of web-available papers or power-point presentations investigat-
ing the phenomena bordering on the code-switching / borrowing distinction was
performed, supplemented by several sessions of listening to popular programs on
Radio Cymru (the Welsh-medium radio station), to experientially verify certain ob-
servations. Altogether over 360 items were noted down for analysis and preliminary
classification. Needless to say, only some are presented here for illustration of the
observed effects. Only the words which are currently used – yet in various spheres
of life – are included for investigation. The selection is intended to allow verifica-
tion of actual pronunciations by native speakers, not the prescribed or desirable
ones. Thus, we deal here with what can be regarded as “popular” borrowings, i.e.
those that appeared orally in the colloquial language. Additionally, the “learned
forms” and the easily distinguishable “international loans” (frequently disguised as
neoclassical formations) have been included, since all of these may have interacted
to produce the actual surface forms. The exclusion affected also calques (or loan
translations), as these will naturally assume the pattern characteristic of the target
language (railway ⇒ rheilffordd (rail = rheil + way = ffordd; political correctness ⇒
cywirdeb gwleidyddol – correct = cywir; correctness = cywirdeb etc.). Consequently,
the analysis is based on the relatively frequently occurring forms (both everyday
and scientific) that remain after the exclusions from the larger data set.


4.2. Classificatory parameters
Winter-Froemel (2008: 158) distinguishes two separate parameters on which loan-
words can vary, as a result obtaining two criteria in which each of them may take
two values:
(5) A. conformity vs. non-conformity to the source language (SL) form (importation
       vs. substitution),
    B. conformity vs. non-conformity to the target language (TL) system.

The criteria defined both in (5A) and in (5B) inherently involve language comparison,
as they rely on a comparison between SL forms and their TL equivalents, how-
ever, in (5B) a more language-internal perspective is adopted. This distinction ap-
pears to be valid when considering loanword integration in the BL. Winter-Froemel
(2008: 159) proposes the following definition:
(6) The term ‘LOANWORD INTEGRATION’ is employed to designate processes by
    which a borrowed word is changed from the SL form in order to obtain structures
    that conform to the TL.

It is our understanding (but also hers – judging by her examples) that stress accom-
modation is one of these integrative processes. As a result, the specific position where
the word stress is located may constitute grounds for classifying the borrowing along
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                              345

the lines determined by the criteria and may be seen as a more or less integrative
element. Let us investigate specific examples beginning with colloquially used items.


4.3. Non-conformity with the Source Language = Conformity to the Target Language
In Welsh polysyllables the main stress falls as a rule on the last syllable but one. If one
or more syllables are suffixed, the rule still applies, i.e. the stress will automatically
move forward to the last syllable but one, e.g. ffenestr / ffenestri (pl.) ‘window(s)’.
In general, the flow of borrowings from the dominant language into its neighbour
is considerable. The older borrowings are not so straightforwardly recognisable as
they have undergone phonological adaptation and modification, which in a good
number of cases involves the stress accent accommodation to the primary stress
site in Welsh (Table 1 – the accented vowel is underlined), which happens in the
greater number of recorded items, i.e. in over 80 cases:

                            English                           Welsh
                           (various)                       (penultimate)
             gooseberry                        gwsberi
             post-office                       postoffis
             school-master                     sgwlmaster
             certificate                       stifficet
             courtesy                          cwrtesi
             Rosemary                          Rosmari
             present                           presennol

   Table 1. Stress-shift to the penultimate site: underived loans

Accent accommodation is sometimes accompanied with vowel syncopy in the post-
tonic unaccented syllable or apocopy of the unaccented ultima, so that the accent
may or may not retain its original site but in Welsh it becomes penultimate (Table 2:
12 examples out of 32 noted):

                            English                 Welsh (penultimate;
                           (various)              after syncopy or apocopy)
             astronomy                         astronmi
             destiny                           tesni
             diamond                           deimwnt
             camomile                          camil
             liqurice                          licris
             labourer                          labrer
             society                           seiat
             wheelbarrow                       whilber
346                                                                       ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


                          English                   Welsh (penultimate;
                         (various)                after syncopy or apocopy)
             liberty                           libart
             pendulum                          pendil
             chocolate                         siocled

   Table 2. Penultimate stress after syncopy or apocopy of the English source

Penultimate stress shift turned out to be productive in forms based on roots (mono-
or polysyllabic) adopted from English which in Welsh yield morphologically complex
items (Table 3: 12 instances of a very frequent pattern, over 120 forms noted):

                          English                            Welsh
                         (various)                        (penultimate)
             canvass                           canfasio
             comfortable                       cyffyrddus
             conjure                           consurio
             melodious                         melodaidd
             melodies                          melodïau
             tourism                           twristaeth
             personal                          personol
             mesmerise                         mesmereiddio
             measure                           mesuro
             bargain                           bargeinio
             kidnap                            cidnapio
             manage                            manejio

   Table 3. Stress-shift to the penultimate site: derived items

Very recent incorporations, sometimes termed “unlisted English” with Welsh deriva-
tional terminations, and bordering on the code-switches – borrowings status, behave
accordingly, as manifested in the following examples (the stressed vowel again un-
derlined). Notice that here no translation needs to be provided: text-io, download-io,
brief-io, quote-io, bulk-io, ban-io, bypass-io, crush-o, trample-o, base-io, connect-io,
babysit-io, decorate-io, concentrate-io, mollycoddle-io, power-walk-io.
    The principle of having borrowed items stressed penultimately applies also to
words that are not so commonly used, namely in the medical or general scientific
vocabulary. Let us quote only a few examples. Strangely enough, while they all
are accented on the last but one syllable, it is also the stressed syllable in the SL:
catalepsy > catalepsia; cerebellum > serebelwm (serebela, pl.); ophthalmology >
offtalmoleg; penicillin > penisilin; astrology > astroleg. Many of the words in this
group, however, will have stress transferred from English.
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                                         347

    The overwhelming predominance of the penultimate stress pattern is evident,
also, in the fact that all borrowed nouns (save two cases) when pluralised, shift stress
to this default site, regardless of where it was placed in the process of borrowing.7
It thus appears that when a word enters the morphological (inflectional or deriva-
tional) component of Modern Welsh it becomes phonologically native and fully
regularised. It seems, therefore, justified to classify all the above-cited examples
as instances of stress-accent substitution, understood in line with Winter-Froemel
(2008: 158) as cases exhibiting non-conformity to the SL while clearly observing the
principle of TL accentuation.


4.4. Conformity with Source Language = Non-conformity to the Target Language
Non-conformity to the Target Language default stress-pattern can take several forms.
Watkins (1974) notices that although in present-day spoken Welsh the word-stress is
normally penultimate, when listening to a Welsh conversation one is struck by the
frequency of pre-penultimate or final accent. The latter is not perceived as a fun-
damentally foreign phenomenon, since it is indigenous to Welsh, brought about by
vowel coalescence or by compounding. Adding to this the special prosodic status
that the final syllable enjoys, it is hardly surprising that when borrowing end-stressed
words from English, most naturally the position of stress-accent is not modified.
Table 4 therefore contains a selection (12 out of 42 items recorded) of those borrow-
ings which have kept their original final syllable stress pattern:

                            English                               Welsh
               appeal                               apêl
               brigade                              brigâd
               persuasion                           perswâd
               parade                               pared
               promenade                            promenad
               farewell                             ffarwel, or ffarwel
               Jubilee                              jiwbilî
               cassette                             cysêt
               Sedate                               sidêt
               cocoon                               cocŵn
               Delete                               dileu
               umbrella8                            ymbarel

    Table 4. Faithfulness to the SL end-stress

7
    The illustration of this regularization will be exemplified in the following section, for the sake
    of convenience.
8
    This example is somewhat problematic in that the Welsh form indeed has the final stress,
    whereas the English source does not. This demonstrates the constraint in Welsh which bans
348                                                                         ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


As for the ante-penultimate stress, it is characteristic of numerous borrowed English
items with which especially conversational Welsh is loaded (Watkins 1974). It can
safely be assumed that the stressed pre-penultimate position, prosodically the weak-
est in Welsh (Williams 1999), is a clear indication of the foreign provenience of an
item. The antepenultimate (or generally pre- penultimate) accent may be the effect
of importing the original stress site from the SL, here English (Table 5, for nouns,
the plural is also shown):

             English                          Welsh                        Welsh plural
        (ante-penultimate)              (ante-penultimate)                  (for nouns)
    elephant                       eliffant                         eliffantod
    insuline                       inswlin                          —
    labyrinth                      labyrinth                        labyrinthau
    melody                         melodi                           melodïau
    parachute                      parasiwt                         parasiwtiau
    paradox                        paradocs                         paradocsau
    paragraph                      paragraff                        paragraffau
    pension                        pensiwn                          pensiynau
    calendar                       calendr    9
                                                                    calendrau
    interlude                      anterliwt                        anterliwtau
    telegraph                      telegraff                        telegraffau
    telegraphy                     telegraffi                       —
    telegram                       telegram                         telegramau
    testament                      testament                        testamentau
    tournament                     twrnamaint                       twrnameintiau
    codicil                        codisil                          codisilau
    ambulance                      ambiwlans                        ambiwlansys
    academy                        academi                          academiau
    bungalow                       byngalo                          byngalos
    catapult                       catapwlt                         catapyltiau
    hooligan                       hwligan                          hwliganiaid
    curriculum                     cwricwlwm                        —
    isolate                        eisoletio                        —

      Table 5. Ante-penultimate stress importation from English to Welsh

     the schwa vowel from occurring in the ultima, thus the English final schwa was simply elided
     in the assimilation process.
9
     This item appears to contain an illicit cluster word-finally, however, in actual pronunciation
     a svarabhakti vowel breaks up the -dr- cluster, so in fact the word is trisyllabic.
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                          349

The group of words which characteristically import the accent position from the
source language comprises the so-called “neo-classical compounds”. Twelve typi-
cal examples are provided below (Table 6), the pattern appears in at least 46 other
recorded forms. When pluralised, they, again, shift the stress to the last but one
syllable (save in one case listed at the bottom of the table).

             English                        Welsh                 Welsh plural
 centimeter                     sentimedr                  sentimedrau
 centigramme                    sentigram                  sentigrammau
 deciliter                      desilitr                   desilitrau
 dictaphone                     dictaffon                  dicatffonau
 Plantagenet                    Plantagenet                —
 Methodist                      Methodist                  Methodistaidd
 Mercury                        Mercwri                    —
 metropolis                     metropolis                 metropolisau
 radiogram                      radiogram                  —
 radiotherapy                   radiotherapi               —
 tubectomy                      tiwbiectomi                tiwbiectomïau
 cerebrum                       serebrwm                   serebra (!)

   Table 6. Neo-classical importations from English

Fisiak (1962: 293) argues that such formations constitute a separate category insofar
as they are created on either a Greek or Latinate basis in English and then, adopted
by a number of languages, with possible slight semantic interference and regular
adaptation mechanisms. He also believes that these need nonetheless to be treated
as loans from English, as they mostly either originated in English and entered the
target language through direct contact or were first adopted by English, and then,
transmitted to other systems, indirectly. This is the line of reasoning we are willing
to adopt here as well and, thus, treat these neo-classicalisms as importations from
or via English.


5. Concluding observations
The general picture painted here may give the impression that, in their majority,
borrowing from English, either colloquial or scientific, do not agree with the target
language typical, penultimate accentuation. This, however, would be a false impres-
sion. While the selection presented here comprises a wide range of items, they are
mostly those which have been borrowed comparatively recently. Thus, the result of
the study has been the presentation of a compelling number of non-penultimate
(non-native) stresses. Older loans are phonologically fully integrated and have already
350                                                                    ANITA BUCZEK-ZAWIŁA


conformed to Target Language phonology (also in terms of participating in the
mutation system). With time, both the older and the newer items may also further
integrate prosodically into the Welsh system. This prosodic integration is already
happening as far as the higher pitch resident in the final syllable is concerned: even
the most recent, “unlisted” items exhibit a higher pitch characteristic of native Welsh
(as well as Welsh-English) words in addition to the acquired penultimate word stress.
It is to be expected that the stress on the last but one syllable will be the predomi-
nant pattern in the newly adopted items as well, even if not immediately. This is
an observation which has actually been reported in certain preliminary studies or
seminars in Bangor University.
    This paper does not seek to establish absolute truths or explain the current
mechanism. Let it, therefore, serve as a contribution to observations concerned
with the interaction between two neighbouring languages on the phonological level.
Undoubtedly, the antepenultimate stress importation (preservation) comes as an
effect caused by the dominance of the English language over the Welsh language
usage. It is a situation that has existed in Wales for centuries and continues until
today. It is, nonetheless, hoped that this modest attempt will provide some insightful
observations and prospect for further research.


Bibliography
Ball M.J., Williams B. 2001. Welsh Phonetics. Lampeter.
Buczek-Zawiła A. 2003. Akcent prozodyczny i melodyczny a specjalny status ostatniej sylaby
    w walijskim. – Roczniki Humanistyczne KUL 51: 17–26.
Buczek-Zawiła A. 2012. L1- and L2- induced misanalysis of the sound and suprasegmental
    structure in English of philology students. – Annales Universitatis Paedagogicae Cra-
    coviensis. Studia Anglica 2: 72–91.
Calabrese A. 2009. Perception, production and acoustic inputs in loanword phonology. –
    Calabrese A., Wetzels W.L. (eds.). Loan phonology. Amsterdam: 59–113.
Fisiak J. 1962. Złożony kontakt językowy w procesie zapożyczania z języka angielskiego
    do pol­skiego. – Język Polski 42.4: 286–294.
Friesner M.L. 2009. The adaptation of Romanian loanwords from Turkish and French. –
    Calabrese A., Wetzels W.L. (eds.). Loan phonology. Amsterdam: 115–129.
Gómez Capuz J. 1997. Towards a typological classification of linguistic borrowing (illustrated
    with Anglicisms in Romance languages). – Revista Alicantina de Estudios Ingleses 10:
    81–94.
Görlach M. 2004. Introduction. – Görlach M. (ed.). English in Europe. Oxford: 1–12.
Griffiths B., Jones D.G. (eds.). 1995. Geiriadur yr Academi: The Welsh Academy English-Welsh
    Dictionary. Cardiff.
Hulst H. van der. 2010. Word accent systems in the languages of Europe. – Goedemas R.,
    Hulst H. van der, Zanten E. van (eds.). Word accent structure in the languages of the
    world. Berlin, New York: 429–508.
Hulst H. van der, Hendriks B., Weijer J. van de 1999. A survey of word prosodic systems of
    European languages. – Hulst H. van der (ed.). Word prosodic systems in the languages
    of Europe. Berlin, New York: 425–475.
Everything must have its place: Accent accommodation in…                                 351

Kang Y. 2011. Loanword phonology. – Oostendorp M. van, Ewen C., Hume E., Rice K. (eds.).
   The Blackwell companion to phonology. [vol. IV]. Oxford: 2258–2282.
Kertész Z. 2006. Approaches to the phonological analysis of loanword adaptation. – The
   Even Yearbook 7: 1–15.
Parry-Williams T.H. 1923. The English element in Welsh: A study of the English loan-words
   in Welsh. London.
Penhallurick R. 2004. Welsh English: phonology. – Kortman B., Schneider E.W. (eds.).
   A handbook of varieties of English. [vol.1: Phonology]. Berlin, New York: 98–112.
Phillips J.D. 2007. Rare and endangered linguistic subsystems in Celtic and Welsh. – Lin-
   guistica e Filologia 24: 153–182.
Thomas A.R. 1997. The Welshness of Welsh English: A Survey paper. – Tristram H.L.C. (ed.).
   The Celtic Englishes. Heilderberg: 55–85.
Watkins T.R. 1974. The accent in Old Welsh – its quality and development. – Bulletin of the
   Board of Celtic Studies 25: 1–11.
Williams B. 1999. The phonetic manifestation of word stress in Welsh. – Dogil G, Williams B.,
   Hulst H. van der (eds.). Word prosodic systems in the languages of Europe. Berlin, New
   York: 311–344.
Winter-Froemel E. 2008. Studying loanwords and loanword integration: Two criteria of
   conformity. – Newcastle Working Papers in Linguistics 14: 156–176.
Yip M. 2006. The symbiosis between perception and grammar in loanword phonology. –
   Lingua 116: 950–975.
