Edinburgh Research Explorer

The phonologization of redundancy
Length and quality in Welsh vowels


Citation for published version:
Iosad, P 2017, 'The phonologization of redundancy: Length and quality in Welsh vowels', Phonology, vol.
34, no. 1, pp. 121-162. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675717000057



Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1017/S0952675717000057


Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer


Document Version:
Peer reviewed version



Published In:
Phonology


Publisher Rights Statement:
This article has been published in a revised form in Phonology
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675717000057. This version is free to view and download for private
research and study only. Not for re-distribution, re-sale or use in derivative works. © copyright holder.




General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.


Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.




Download date: 25. Aug. 2026
                    The phonologization of redundancy
                         Length and quality in Welsh vowels*

                                              Pavel Iosad

                                         1st November 2016



                                                 Abstract


          ‘Phonologization’ is a process whereby a phonetic phenomenon enters the phonolo-
      gical grammar and becomes conceptualized as the result of categorical manipulation of
      phonological symbols. I analyse the phonologization of a predictable phonological pat-
      tern in Welsh, with particular attention to identifying criteria for whether phonologiza-
      tion has occurred. I argue for a model where phonologization experiences bottom-up
      and top-down biases. From the bottom up, there is pressure to phonologize phenom-
      ena with a categorical distribution; from the top down, there exist formal constraints
      on featural speciﬁcation. I focus on the requirement for featural speciﬁcations to obey
      the Contrastivist Hypothesis, which denies that redundant features can be involved in
      phonological computation, in the context of a framework with emergent features. I sug-
      gest that the Contrastivist Hypothesis acts as a useful check for emergent-feature theor-
      ies, whilst independent phonologization criteria provide contrastivist approaches with
      a more solid conceptual underpinning.
    *Portions of this paper were presented at the 1st Edinburgh Symposium on Historical Phonology, the Edin-
burgh P-workshop, GLOW workshop Phonological Speciﬁcation and Interface Interpretation (Brussels), the 8th
North American Phonology Conference (Montreal), the 21st and 22nd Welsh Linguistics Seminars (Gregynog),
the 1st Conference on Linguistic Diversity in Wales (Aberystwyth), and the 24th Manchester Phonology Meet-
ing. Thanks to the audiences at these forums for questions and comments, particularly Gwen Awbery, Ricardo
Bermúdez-Otero, Josef Fruehwald, Daniel Currie Hall, and Michaela Hejná. For help with ﬁeldwork, thanks to
Christine Jones and Mererid Hopwood (University of Wales Trinity Saint David) and Diarmuid Johnson (Menter
Rhos-y-Gilwen). At Phonology, a huge thanks to three anonymous reviewers, an anonymous associate editor,
Ellen Kaisse, and Colin Ewen for numerous questions and suggestions that have immeasurably improved the
paper. All errors of fact or interpretation remain entirely mine.



                                                     1
1      Introduction: contrast, predictability and phonologization

This paper explores the relationship between contrast, interpreted as the absence of redund-

ant information from phonological representations, and the phonologization of predictable

properties. I argue that although phonologization via the life cycle of phonological processes

introduces predictable information into phonological representation, this fact is compatible

with a version of the Contrastivist Hypothesis (Hall 2007, Dresher 2009), which requires re-

dundant features to be absent from the phonology. To demonstrate the viability of such a

framework, I oﬀer a case study involving mutually predictable distribution, where standard

criteria fail to unequivocally identify a ‘contrastive’ phonological property. I address the fol-

lowing three questions:


      • Can mutually predictable distribution of phonological speciﬁcations be reconciled

       with the Contrastivist Hypothesis?

      • How can we establish that a distinction is accessible to the phonology as a featural

       speciﬁcation, and hence subject to contrastivist restrictions?

      • Can the Contrastivist Hypothesis be reconciled with the process of phonologization

       introducing redundant information into the phonology?


1.1     The Contrastivist Hypothesis and its discontents

Our starting point is the Contrastivist Hypothesis, formulated as follows by (Hall 2007: 20):

‘The phonological component of a language L operates only on those features which are ne-

cessary to distinguish the phonemes of L from one another.’ As charted by Dresher (2009),

this principle was historically important in structuralist phonology, but downgraded by

many (though not all) currents of generative phonological theory. More recently years it has

again attracted the attention of phonologists, notably those working within the ‘Toronto

school’ (e. g. Dresher, Piggott & Rice 1994, Dresher 2009, Hall 2007, Cowper & Hall 2014,

Mackenzie 2013).




                                               2
   Under the version of the Contrastivist Hypothesis given above, contrastiveness is deﬁned

over phonemes as understood in generative phonology, that is segments found in underlying

representations in a language. Kiparsky (2017) calls them ‘m-phonemes’ (for ‘morphophon-

emes’) — a usage that I adopt here. Hence, establishing whether a feature is ‘contrastive’ in

the language can be non-trivial, since the set of m-phonemes can only be discovered through

careful analysis.

   Disagreements over such analysis are frequent in cases of mutually predictable distribu-

tion, where two apparently distinct phonological properties are coextensive in surface rep-

resentations. Both properties are candidates for being contrastive (and thus available to the

phonological grammar), but under strict contrastivist assumptions one of them must be re-

dundant. The problem for contrastivist approaches is that this choice must be made, but it

appears to be vacuous and forced only by theoretical considerations, since the data seem

equally compatible with either solution.

   I consider a case of mutually predictable distribution in Welsh, focusing on vowel quant-

ity and quality. As in familiar languages like English and German, Welsh vowels can be di-

vided into two classes simultaneously diﬀering in quantity and ‘tense’/‘lax’ quality. The ana-

lysis of these systems is controversial: some scholars view the contrast as primarily one of

length (e. g. Durand 2005), others see the quality distinction as primary (e. g. Harris 1994);

yet others subsume the diﬀerence under ‘syllable cut’ (e. g. Botma & van Oostendorp 2012).

   I focus on dialectal diversity in Welsh vowel systems and concentrate in particular on

south-western varieties, where, according to previous descriptions, vowel quantity and qual-

ity have diverged in ways unattested in other dialects. I report an acoustic study and argue

that in these varieties quality must be represented in the phonology separately from the

length. I argue that this is consistent with a view of phonologization where the extraction of

phonological patterns proceeds bottom-up, on the basis of categoricity in the ambient data,

but the precise characterization of the resulting phenomena in terms of distinctive features

is driven at least partly by top-down contrastivist pressures.




                                              3
1.2     Establishing the criteria

Being able to verify or falsify a theory that allows for manipulation of predictable informa-

tion by the phonology requires criteria to establish whether a phenomenon falls within the

purview of phonological grammar. It is common to ascribe ‘gradient’ phenomena to ‘phon-

etics’ and to take categoricity of distribution as a sign of phonologization (e. g. Myers 2000).

However, this approach can be problematic. Even classifying phonological phenomena as

‘categorical’ or ‘gradient’ is not trivial (Strycharczuk 2012).

      In this paper, I argue that the phonological status of a pattern should be determined

with reference to criteria of modularity (e. g. Scheer 2010, Bermúdez-Otero 2012), which

requires that the ﬂow of information between grammatical modules be restricted. I focus

on representational incommensurability between modules. Speciﬁcally, some kinds of ob-

jects are proprietary to ‘their’ module: for phonology, examples are featural speciﬁcations,

autosegmental association lines, metrical constituency, etc. Under this approach, if a pat-

tern makes crucial reference to such proprietary phonological information, it must also be

phonological, because only computation inside the phonological module can access such

phonology-internal information.

      Using this criterion, we can establish if a pattern is within the scope of phonological

grammar and thus, ideally, contrastivist restrictions. The Contrastivist Hypothesis can be

reframed as follows:


      • If P is the set of patterns that can be established as phonological in language L; and

      • If PH is the set of phonemes in L; and

      • If F is the set of features necessary to distinguish the phonemes of PH; then

      • No pattern in P makes crucial reference to features that are not in F.


      Assuming that we can establish the extent of P and PH using the modularity criteria sug-

gested above — as I will exemplify in this paper — the content and correctness of the con-

trastivist hypothesis turn on the understanding of ‘necessity’ in the deﬁnition of the set F. In



                                                 4
this paper I argue that contentful predictions can indeed be made, if it is understood with

reference to a contrastive hierarchy of distinctive features (Dresher 2009).


1.3     Phonologization and redundancy

Another problem, directly relevant to the issue of phonologization, is the determination of

PH, the set of relevant ‘phonemes’. Kiparsky (2017) calls segments posed by the analyst for

underlying representations ‘m-phonemes’ (‘morphophonemes’), and contrastivists in the

generative tradition have usually concentrated on this m-phonemic level. Kiparsky (2017),

however, suggests distinguishing between m-phonemes and ‘l-phonemes’, for ‘lexical phon-

emes’: segments produced by phonological grammar at the lexical level (word-level phono-

logy) in a stratal framework that builds on the insights of Lexical Phonology. Kiparsky (2017)

argues that typological and theoretical generalizations such as those concerning the struc-

ture of inventories or historical change should properly refer to this l-phonemic level. Cru-

cially, he argues, the l-phonemic level may contain predictable information such as redund-

ant feature speciﬁcations, if it is introduced by phonological computation at the lexical level.

Hence, this framework appears incompatible with the Contrastivist Hypothesis.

      The presence of redundant information in the phonological computation is only to be

expected if the source of phonological patterns lies in the life cycle of phonological patterns,

and speciﬁcally within the process of phonologization (Hyman 1976, 2013, Kiparsky 2015).

This term is commonly used to describe a linguistic change whereby a phenomenon previ-

ously construed as ‘phonetic’ enters the purview of phonological grammar. Phonetic pro-

cesses give predictable (if stochastic) outcomes. Therefore, the system immediately after

phonologization is likely to have the new symbols standing in predictable distributions.

‘New’ phonological patterns will therefore tend to be allophonic, potentially reducing the

scope for positing an m-phonemic contrast that could justify the phonological involvement

of the relevant feature under contrastivist assumptions.

      There is a tension between the Contrastivist Hypothesis and the study of phonologiza-

tion, because contrastivist approaches privilege ‘top-down’ information about contrast and

morphophonological patterning, whilst models of phonologization recognize the important


                                               5
role of ‘bottom-up’ information. Under contrastivist assumptions, the evidence for the ex-

istence of a phonological segment and its representational make-up comes from categorical

information, such as the structure of the inventory and the segment’s morphophonological

behaviour. Theories of phonologization, on the other hand, emphasize the role of variation

in the speech signal, whether inherent and uncontrolled or speaker-speciﬁc.

    A third argument in this paper is that this tension can be resolved in a framework where

phonological features are categorical and assigned on the basis of contrastivist reasoning,

but emergent and phonetically arbitrary (‘substance-free’). This makes it possible to con-

struct an adequate theory of phonologization that takes the speech signal as its starting

point. In this framework, contrastivist assumptions serve both to capture the existence of

top-down, featurally implemented biases in phonologization, and to restrict the set of pos-

sible speciﬁcations one could assign to a given inventory.

    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2 I review the available

knowledge regarding vowel quantity and quality in dialects of Modern Welsh. Section 3

presents the results of an acoustic study of a south-western variety of Welsh that has been

reported to show an unusual deviation from the common Welsh system; I argue that in this

variety ‘tense’/‘lax’ quality and quantity are separately represented in the phonology. In sec-

tion 4 I take the criteria for phonological status developed in the course of this argument

and apply them to other varieties of Welsh, showing the extent of dialect variation in feature

speciﬁcations. Finally, in section 5 I reconsider the status of contrastive speciﬁcations in an

emergent-feature framework and their role in phonologization.



2    Vowel quantity and quality in Welsh

Here I review available descriptions of vowel quantity and quality and Welsh and argue that

there is good evidence for viewing quantity as a phonological distinction, speciﬁcally one

expressed via suprasegmental (metrical) structure. I also review the controversies in the lit-

erature around the phonemic interpretation of the Welsh vowel system.




                                              6
                                 Height    Front       Central   Back
                                 High       iː ɪ        (ɨː ɨ)   uː ʊ
                                 Mid        eː ɛ          ə      oː ɔ
                                 Low                    aː a

                              Table 1: Representative vowel inventory


2.1     The received view

A representative inventory of Welsh stressed monophthongs is shown in table 1 (Ball & Wil-

liams 2001, Mayr & Davies 2011, Hannahs 2013). Some variation of this system is common

throughout the Welsh-speaking region. Apart from the diﬀerences in the realization of short

and long vowels, subject to discussion below, the following dialectal variations should be

noted:


      • The vowels [ɨː] and [ɨ] are found only in northern Wales;

      • The vowel [ə] lacks a phonologically long counterpart;

      • In many varieties there is an additional low vowel, variously a low front [æː] or a raising

        and/or centralizing diphthong, considered to be an allophone of [aː].


      Here, I concentrate on the relationship between the short and long vowels.


2.1.1    Distribution

All dialects of Welsh restrict phonologically long vowels to stressed syllables. In monosyl-

lables we ﬁnd both short and long vowels.


(1)    All dialects

       a. [ˈtʰoːn]      tôn      ‘tune’

       b. [ˈtʰɔn]       ton      ‘wave’

      In polysyllabic words, stress overwhelmingly falls on the penult, apart from a small num-

ber of native words with ﬁnal stress and a handful of borrowings with antepenultimate stress.



                                                   7
      There is a major distinction between northern and southern varieties of Welsh in the

behaviour of stressed penults (Awbery 1984). In South Welsh, short and long vowels are dis-

tinct in both penultimate and ﬁnal stressed syllables. However, long vowels in penultimate

syllables are phonetically shorter than long vowels in ﬁnal syllables (e. g. G. E. Jones 1971),

and often described as ‘half-long’.


(2)    South Welsh

       a. [ˈtʰoˑnɛ]     tonau    ‘tunes’

       b. [ˈtʰɔnɛ]      tonnau ‘waves’

      In North Welsh, stressed vowels are always short in penults, so the minimal pair in (2) is

impossible in such varieties: both tonau and tonnau are realized as [ˈtʰɔna].

      In addition to these patterns, the native lexicon of Welsh enforces restrictions on the dis-

tribution of short and long stressed vowels depending on the properties of following conson-

ants (Wells 1979, Awbery 1984). The restrictions in ﬁnal stressed syllables (including mono-

syllables) are as follows:


      • Short before [pʰ tʰ kʰ m ŋ];

      • Long before [b d ɡ f θ χ v ð];

      • Long or short before [n l r], with lexically determined distribution;

      • In northern varieties, short before [s ɬ]. In the south, long before ﬁnal [s ʃ ɬ];

      • Before [w j], vowels are always short in the south. In the north, they may be long in ﬁnal

        stressed syllables, but the distribution is lexical;

      • In the south, vowels are always short before consonant clusters. In the north, vowels

        are obligatorily long before fricative-stop clusters [sp st sk ɬt ft] but obligatorily short

        before other clusters.


      In non-ﬁnal stressed syllables, vowels are always short in Northern Welsh. In the south,

the distribution of length in stressed penults is very similar to that in stressed ultima, but

                                                   8
not fully identical: vowels are obligatorily short before medial [s ʃ ɬ] but long before the same

consonants word-ﬁnally.

      To summarize, phonologically long vowels are restricted to stressed syllables. In north-

ern Welsh they are further restricted to ﬁnal stressed syllables. Vowel length in the native

lexicon is largely predictable. It depends both on syllable structure (with a dispreference for

long vowels in closed syllables) and on the melody of the following consonant. Most often,

the length of a stressed vowel is predictable from the manner and laryngeal speciﬁcation of

a following consonant, with the exception of [n l r], where the distribution is lexically condi-

tioned.


2.1.2     Phonological length and phonetic duration

The phonetic correlates of the phonological distinction identiﬁed above as ‘length’ include

both vowel quality and duration. First, phonologically long vowels have greater duration

than phonologically short vowels (e. g. G. E. Jones 1971, Grawunder, Asmus & C. Anderson

2015). As for consonant duration, descriptions of South Welsh agree that consonants after a

short stressed penult are ‘half-long’ irrespective of whether the vowel is followed by a single

consonant ([ˈtʰɔnˑɛ] tonnau ‘waves’), or by a consonant sequence ([ˈamˑsɛr] amser ‘time’);

see e. g. A. R. Thomas 1961, Awbery 1986, C. H. Thomas 1993. The situation is less clear in

North Welsh. Many sources (summarized in Hannahs 2013: §2.2.6) mention ‘gemination’ of

fortis stops [pʰ tʰ kʰ] after a stressed penult, and there are scattered references to other con-

sonants being lengthened in the same position. Subject to further research, it appears that

the lengthening of consonants after a short stressed vowel in a penultimate syllable is uni-

versal across Welsh dialects.

      Similar facts obtain in stressed ultima. G. E. Jones (1984: p. 54) states that consonants are

long after short vowels in this context:


(3)    a. [ˈmanː]      man       ‘place’

       b. [ˈmɑːn]      mân       ‘ﬁne, small’




                                                  9
(4)    a. [ˈtalː]      tal       ‘tall’

       b. [ˈtɑːl]      tâl       ‘payment’

      A. R. Thomas (1966) gives a similar statement for the Alyn Valley dialect (North Wales).

For South Wales, the length of ﬁnal consonants after a short stressed vowel is mentioned by

C. H. Thomas (1993: pp. 69–70). For North Welsh monosyllables, the claim is corroborated

experimentally by Grawunder, Asmus & C. Anderson (2015).

      Thus, phonological ‘length’ is reﬂected by phonetic duration, and there is also a trading

relation between the duration of stressed vowels and following consonants.


2.1.3    Length and quality

Another correlate of phonological ‘length’ is vowel quality. Vowels other than [ə] (and likely

[a]) come in ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ pairs: [oː] vs. [ɔ], [iː] vs. [ɪ], and so on. Such pairs pattern together,

as they participate in alternations determined by the consonantal context:

(5)    a. [ˈtʰeːɡ]     teg       ‘fair’

       b. [ˈtʰɛkʰa]    tecaf     ‘fairest’

      It is sometimes desirable to refer to such vowel pairs without prejudice to the exact real-

ization; here, I adopt the useful notation from Wmﬀre 2003 using double slashes: //i//, //e//

etc.

      The precise quality of vowels depends on their phonological quantity and their position

with respect to stress. The standard picture is as follows:

   1. Non-low stressed long vowels are ‘tense’ [iː uː eː oː]. Sources diﬀer as to whether there

        is a similar qualitative distinction between long and short //a//: for instance, Awbery

        (1986) does not describe a diﬀerence between [a] and [aː], but G. E. Jones (1984) de-

        scribes long [aː] as somewhat retracted compared to [a]. Some descriptions (e. g. C. H.

        Thomas 1993, G. E. Jones 2000) use the symbol [ɑ(ː)] for the ‘long’ member. However,

        in an instrumental study Mayr & Davies (2011) do not ﬁnd a reliable qualitative dis-

        tinction between short and long //a// in monosyllables, and Wmﬀre (2007) states that

        long //a// is never phonetically [ɑ];

                                                  10
  2. Stressed short vowels in South Wales are lax [ɛ ɪ ɔ ʊ]. This is conﬁrmed for monosyl-

       lables by Mayr & Davies (2011). For North Wales, detailed descriptions are lacking, es-

       pecially for stressed penults, but broadly the situation appears similar;

  3. The length contrast is neutralized in unstressed syllables. There is agreement in the

       literature that quality varies between ‘tense’ and ‘lax’. For instance Awbery (1986) de-

       scribes the unstressed vowel system of Pembrokeshire Welsh thus:

          • In pretonic syllables and in closed ﬁnal syllables, both ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ variants

            are allowed: [pʰɛˈdɔːli] ∼ [pʰeˈdɔːli] pedoli ‘to shoe (a horse)’, [ˈwɛːdɪn] ∼ [ˈwɛːdin]

            wedyn ‘afterwards’;

          • In pretonic syllables in hiatus, only ‘tense’ variants are allowed: [r̥ʰeˈoːle] rheolau

            ‘rules’ (*[r̥ʰɛˈoːle]);

          • In ﬁnal open syllables, high vowels can only be ‘tense’, but mid vowels are in ‘free’

            variation.

       Thus, it appears that greater leeway in the qualitative properties of unstressed vowels

       compared to those of stressed vowels is characteristic of most varieties of Welsh.


2.2     Analysis

As discussed in section 1.1, the close relationship between vowel quantity and vowel length

such as that found in Welsh, presents a potential problem if redundant information has no

place in phonological representation. One such approach is the traditional taxonomic frame-

work that aims to represent all utterances as uniquely identiﬁable phoneme strings, where

‘phonemes’ are understood as minimally redundant units standing in overlapping distribu-

tion. Kiparsky (2017) dubs these units ‘s-phonemes’ (for ‘structuralist phonemes’) and ar-

gues that they have no privileged place in phonological architecture.

      As the existing literature on Welsh demonstrates, an s-phonemic framework requires

a choice between length and tenseness, but the data do not provide much guidance on

which analysis is better. Much of the literature designates quality as primary (e. g. Pilch 1957,


                                                 11
Watkins 1967, G. E. Jones 2000, C. H. Thomas 1993), with length marks often altogether omit-

ted from the phonemic transcriptions. Length is more consistently written in early literature

that does not use a phonemic approach (e. g. Sommerfelt 1925), but also in some later work

(e. g. A. R. Thomas 1960).

   The reasons for this choice are seldom explicitly discussed. A. R. Thomas (1966) justiﬁes

his choice of length by referring to ‘symmetry’. Length is independently required to distin-

guish /a/ and /aː/: since it is used in the phonology of the language, it can be applied to

express the same contrast in other pairs, making ‘tongue position’ redundant. On the other

hand, Watkins (1967) points out the existence of long ‘lax’ vowels in English borrowings,

quoting [ˈbrɔːn] ‘brawn’ and [ɪnd͡ʒɪˈnɛːr] ‘engineer’, and argues that this makes tenseness

unpredictable and thus phonemic.

   Both approaches are open to criticism. The symmetry-based argument for a quantity

analysis is not empirical; it might also not go through if varieties with a quality distinction

between [a] and [ɑː] do exist. The argument for a quality analysis based on borrowings might

be more plausible, but it runs into the unclear status of borrowings in the broader phonology.

Moreover, it is not entirely clear that the borrowed long vowels are qualitatively identical to

the native short ones: for instance, C. H. Thomas (1993) uses diﬀerent symbols for the native

short //o// (she writes [ɒ]) and the borrowed long [ɔ].

   Here, I adopt the analysis defended in Iosad (2012), according to which quantity (more

speciﬁcally, moraicity) must be present in underlying representations (i. e. it is m-phon-

emic). This is motivated by the interaction of the abstract ‘length’ distinction with the con-

sonantal context; such systems, where vowel length depends on the properties of the fol-

lowing consonant, even where that consonant is not part of a cluster, submit to a moraic

analysis (see, for instance, Morén 2001 on Metropolitan New York English, Bye & de Lacy

2008 on Latvian, and Torres-Tamarit 2015 on Northern Romance).

   The basic idea, developed in depth in Iosad (2012), to which I refer for details, and also

shared by Hannahs (2013), is that lengthening is driven by a stress-to-weight requirement,

which is counteracted by faithfulness to underlying moraic speciﬁcations and by restrictions

on what segments can acquire a mora. Within this framework, the phonotactics of stressed


                                              12
syllables across Welsh dialects can be analysed as a mix of ‘distinctive’ and ‘coerced’ weight

in terms of Morén (2001). Weight coercion arises when a (stressed) syllable is required to be

bimoraic. This can be satisﬁed by the lengthening of either the consonant or the vowel (with

the choice dependent on the ranking of relevant constraints), or fail to be satisﬁed (as in the

case of North Welsh penultimate syllables in hiatus, where stressed vowels remain short). In

an Optimality Theoretic (Prince & Smolensky 1993) framework such as Morén’s (2001), the

typology can be derived from the ranking of DEPLINK-µ constraints for vowels and various

kinds of consonants vis-à-vis each other and the stress-to-weight constraint.

   ‘Distinctive weight’, with underlying moraic speciﬁcation faithfully reproduced on the

surface, arises in the case of [n l r], which can be preceded by both long and short vowels,

with a lexical distribution. In cases such as the minimal pair in (2), vowel lengthening de-

pends on whether the post-tonic consonant is underlyingly moraic: if it is, there is no need

for lengthening, because the second mora is already provided; if it is not, lengthening ensues

(Iosad 2012).

   Thus, the behaviour of Welsh stressed vowels can be derived from moraic structure, some

of it underlying. The moraicity of the vowels is deﬁnitely involved in the phonological gram-

mar. It appears more diﬃcult to oﬀer a principled account of these facts if vowel quality is the

sole phonologically relevant property, and so I conclude that if a choice between quantity

and quality is to be made, then quantity is preferred.

   Even if we accept this, however, the status of vowel ‘tensing’ (and/or ‘laxing’) in the gram-

mar still remains ambiguous. One option is that it is not a symbolic phonological operation

but part of ‘phonetic implementation’, with tenseness never entering the phonological com-

putation. The other possibility is that the distribution is introduced by the grammar, via a

rule along the following lines (or an equivalent OT ranking):
                     [             ]
                       +stressed
(6) V → [α tense] /
                         α long

   This could be a problem for contrastivist approaches, since the feature [(±)tense] is not

needed for ‘m-phonemic’ contrasts: it is entirely predictable, being only introduced by rule

(6). Crucially, the same cannot be said of moraicity, because it must be encoded in underlying

                                              13
representations at least for [n l r] in Welsh.¹ In a sense, this approach subverts the entire

controversy: once a moraic representation of quantity is accepted, there is no need for a

segmental feature [±long], and there is no obligatory choice between [±long] and [±tense]

to make. (I return to this issue brieﬂy in section 6.)

    However, this analysis does not rule out the distinction between ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ vowels

being visible to the phonology. In the remainder of the paper, I will argue that this distinction

in Welsh must also be part of the phonological computation, despite being redundant at the

‘s-phonemic’ level (in some varieties). To verify this, I use the criteria for phonological status

oﬀered in section 1.2. Speciﬁcally, I discuss the distribution of length and quantity in several

varieties of Welsh, and show that the ‘tenseness’ distinction fulﬁls the following two criteria:


    • It is inherently (not accidentally) categorical, in that its categoricity both can be estab-

       lished and cannot be derived using a continuous function from some other categorical

       distinction;² and

    • Its distribution is regulated by proprietary phonological factors.


    Having established that ‘tenseness’ has undergone phonologization to a degree where

it is now part of ‘l-phonemic’ representations in Welsh, I will then reconsider the criteria of

contrastive status necessary for the Contrastivist Hypothesis to be falsiﬁable.



3    Quantity and quality in South-West Welsh

This section focuses on varieties of Welsh spoken in the south-west part of the country, spe-

ciﬁcally the counties of Carmarthenshire, Cardiganshire (Ceredigion), and the northern part

of Pembrokeshire. These dialects possess a sound pattern that, unusually for Welsh, involves

‘lax’ long mid vowels [ɛː ɔː] in the native vocabulary. As far as I am aware, these data have not

previously been examined instrumentally, or brought to bear on the question of quantity-

quality interactions in Welsh, which provides the motivation for the study.
     ¹It is also likely that underlying moraicity for vowels may be necessary to account for exceptional ﬁnal stress,
as in [maŋˈɡiː] mamgu ‘grandmother’ (see Iosad 2012: §6.4.5.3.2).
     ²See Scobbie (2007) for a discussion of such ‘accidental’ categoricity.



                                                        14
3.1     Available descriptions

Several descriptions of dialects from this area are available. C. Jones & Thorne (1992) oﬀer

an overview for a general audience. Awbery (1986) provides an explicit description of the

phonology of Pembrokeshire Welsh in a generative framework. Wmﬀre (2003) is focused on

Cardiganshire placenames, but also provides numerous details of the phonology of relevant

dialects. All these descriptions recognize the existence of distinct allophones for long mid

vowels: [eː oː] and [ɛː ɔː]. The latter appear in penultimate syllables when the vowel in the

following (unstressed) syllable is high //i// or //u//:


(7)    Tense vowels before non-high vowels

       a. [ˈeːdɛ]       edau    ‘thread’

       b. [ˈoːɡɔv]      ogof    ‘cave’

(8)    Lax vowels before high vowels

       a. [ˈtʰɛːbɪɡ]    tebyg   ‘similar’

       b. [ˈkʰɔːdi]     codi    ‘rise’

      Long mid vowels in monosyllables are always tense. No similar allophony is described for

either low or high long vowels or any kind of phonologically short vowel. Changes in relevant

types of phonological conditioning produce the expected alternations:


(9)    a. [ˈtʰreː]      tref    ‘town’

       b. [ˈtʰrɛːvɪð]   trefydd ‘towns’

(10)    a. [ˈkʰɔːdi]     codi    ‘to rise’

        b. [ˈkʰoːdɔð] cododd ‘((s)he) rose’

      If these descriptions are correct, then these dialects are a potentially valuable testing

ground for the status of [ɛː ɔː] in native (rather than borrowed) vocabulary. However, aud-

itory descriptions cannot give us conﬁdence that this south-western pattern is, in fact, cat-

egorical. In this paper, I report the results of an acoustic study conducted to verify these

descriptions and establish the status of the pattern.

                                               15
3.2     Methods

Eight participants in Carmarthen were recruited beforehand and on the spot; the demo-

graphic data are reported in table 5 in the Appendix. The convenience sampling has created

some skewing in terms of gender and age. Since the focus of the study is on phonological

aspects of the patterning rather than on precise factors driving sociolinguistic variation, this

skew will not be further discussed.

      Also as a result of the convenience sampling, the study included two speakers who have

lived in the relevant area for a considerable period of time but reported being brought

up elsewhere in Wales. Sp4 was brought up in the capital, Cardiﬀ; however, their Welsh-

speaking parent is from the south-western area, and they show much the same system as

the other south-western speakers. Their data was therefore pooled with other south-western

speakers. Sp8, on the other hand, who was brought up in Aberystwyth, in mid-Wales, but

has lived in the area for over ten years, turned out to have a diﬀerent system. I report the

data gathered from this speaker in section 3.3.3 by way of contrast to the south-western sys-

tem, but do not oﬀer a detailed analysis for lack of complete data. In addition, one of the

demographically south-western speakers (Sp1) did not show the expected pattern, but in-

stead demonstrated the system described for other South Welsh varieties. Since that system

is relatively well understood, I do discuss those data in detail in section 3.3.1.

      In contrast to Mayr & Davies (2011), the present study used actual rather than nonce

words. Disyllabic words of a suitable shape were chosen, with reference to frequency counts

in a corpus of written Welsh (Ellis et al. 2001). As far as possible, the wordlist aimed for bal-

anced representation of the following variables:


      • Quality of the stressed vowel. All of //ə i u e o// were included; //a// was excluded, as

        it is not expected to show qualitative variation in these varieties;

      • Phonological length of the stressed vowel, in several consonantal contexts

      • Consonant place of articulation;

      • Phonological category of post-tonic vowel (high vs. non-high)


                                                 16
      The full wordlist of 118 words is given in table 6 in the Appendix, with the expected pro-

nunciation of the item in a south-western dialect. There were a total of 2,767 tokens analysed.

Words were presented in their orthographic representation in the standard language: Welsh

spelling is transparent enough for the intended vowel to be easily recoverable. Although

some patterns of interest are less common in the standard language than in dialects (not-

ably //u// in non-ﬁnal syllables), meaning no suitable test items could be found for some

conditions, no attempt was made to guess dialectal pronunciations and represent them in

the stimuli.

      Stimuli were presented to participants in a self-paced reading task, with items appearing

on a screen in three independently randomized blocks. The stimuli were embedded in the

carrier phrase Glywes i’r gair     ddoe ‘I heard the word    yesterday’. In the brieﬁng, speak-

ers were instructed to produce natural rather than spelling-based forms (which they did to

varying extents).

      The acoustic analysis was completed using Praat (Boersma & Weenink 2015). The seg-

ments were marked up by hand, noting the duration of vocalic intervals, consonantal inter-

vals (stop closure, frication duration etc.) and pre- and post-aspiration intervals separately.

Formant measurements were taken at the midpoint of every vowel in ﬁnal and penultimate

syllables. The raw acoustic data, Praat TextGrid ﬁles, formant measurements, as well as an R

package with the resulting data are available online (Iosad 2016).


3.3     Results

The study reveals the existence of at least three diﬀerent patterns of quantity-quality inter-

actions. We begin with speaker Sp1, who shows the neat co-occurrence of length and tense-

ness characteristic of most dialects of South Welsh. The largest group of speakers exemplify

the south-western system as described in the literature. Finally, Sp8 shows a pattern that

appears to not have been systematically described before.


3.3.1    The standard southern system




                                               17
                                                                 //i//                                        //e//



                                          200


                                          150
 Duration including preaspiration, msec




                                          100


                                          50



                                                                 //o//                                        //u//



                                          200


                                          150


                                          100


                                          50



                                                       Short               Long                     Short                Long
                                                                                     Vowel length


                                                        Figure 1: Vowel duration by vowel category and length, Sp1


Speaker Sp1 shows the ‘standard’ South Welsh system. There is a distinction in duration

between phonologically short and long vowels. Figure 1 demonstrates this by plotting the

density of the distribution of durations for diﬀerent short and long vowels, together with

means and ±1 standard deviations. A two-way ANOVA with vowel length and vowel quality

as independent variables and vowel duration including preaspiration³ shows both factors

to be signiﬁcant: for vowel length, the ANOVA gives F (1, 278) = 554.36, p < 0.00001 and for

vowel quality F (3, 278) = 23.74, p < 0.00001, presumably reﬂecting inherent length eﬀects.

                                           As for vowel quality, ﬁg. 2 shows F1 and F2 values for this speaker in short and long vowels.

Instead of the traditional dot plot, the plot shows a binned 2D kernel density estimate of the

distribution of tokens for each category on the basis of this data. Thus, the plot shows the
    ³I do not discuss the status of preaspiration in detail here. Its existence in Welsh has until recently gone largely
unnoticed, apart from a brief mention by Ball & Williams (2001); however, more recently it has been described
for some varieties (e. g. Morris 2010). Iosad (2017) discusses its characteristics in the present dataset in more
detail. Brieﬂy, preaspiration is found before the fortis stops [pʰ tʰ kʰ], which are preceded by short vowels. If the
duration of preaspiration is included, then the duration of such short vowels is in line with the duration of short
vowels that do not precede fortis stops; I take this to indicate that vowel duration including preaspiration is a
suitable measure, although further research is needed to reliably establish this.




                                                                                      18
                        Short vowels                             Long vowels


      200




      400




                                                                                         Vowel
                                                                                            //e//
 F1




                                                                                            //i//
      600                                                                                   //o//
                                                                                            //u//




      800




            3000        2000           1000              3000    2000          1000
                                               F2


                    Figure 2: Formant values of vowels by length, speaker Sp1


extent of variation within each category but also the region of the vowel space where most

of the tokens are concentrated.

       In this case, long and short vowels form distinct clusters in the vowel space, particularly

along the F1 dimension. However, in principle this qualitative diﬀerence could be an eﬀect

of under- or overshoot (Lindblom 1963) relative to a fairly high target, so that the shorter

the duration of the vowel, the lower (‘laxer’) it is in quality. The apparently categorical diﬀer-

ence could then derive not from the existence of two qualitative categories underlying the

distribution of the tokens but simply from the distribution of duration, without a categorical

quality distinction.

       If this were the case, we expect the relationship between the duration of the vowel and

its quality to be expressible as a continuous function. To verify whether the relationship of

vowel duration and vowel quality is continuous or discrete, several generalized additive mod-

els were ﬁt using the mgcv package (Wood 2006) in the R statistical environment (R Core Team

                                                    19
2016). A major motivation for the use of additive rather than linear models is their ability to

model non-linear eﬀects, which, as we shall see, are present in the data. After initial model-

ling, the residuals showed a non-normal distribution; this was corrected by treating log2 of

F1 as the dependent variable. Independent variables included vowel quality, F2 (since the

vowels are not evenly distributed in the vowel space), and the duration of the vowel including

preaspiration of the following consonant.

   A good ﬁt was obtained in a model that included an interaction between vowel length and

vowel quality, as well as a random intercept for lexical item. A selection of the better models

is shown in table 7 in the Appendix, which includes the estimated coeﬃcients and 95% con-

ﬁdence intervals. An eﬀect is considered signiﬁcant if the conﬁdence interval excludes zero

(these cases are marked with an asterisk).

   To evaluate goodness of ﬁt of the diﬀerent models, we can use the Akaike Information

Criterion (see Burnham & D. R. Anderson 2004 for a brief practical introduction). Brieﬂy, the

AIC produces a measure of the deviance explained by the model with a trade-oﬀ against

the degrees of freedom, to avoid overﬁtting. Burnham & D. R. Anderson (2004) recommend

using second-order AIC (AI C c ) in cases with relatively small samples, as is the case for all the

data sets in this paper. Absolute AI C (c ) values for diﬀerent models are less informative than

diﬀerence (∆AI C (c ) ) between the best model in the set (the one with the smallest value) and

the model of interest. It is commonly assumed that a model with a ∆AI C ≤ 2 is substantially

supported by the data, one with a ∆AI C of between 4 and 7 is substantially less supported by

the data, and a model with a ∆AI C of over 10 has essentially no support.

   This type of modelling allows us to disentangle the inﬂuence of phonetic duration on

vowel quality (e. g. undershoot eﬀects) from the eﬀects of a phonological ‘length’ category.

Table 7 shows that both of these factors exert an inﬂuence. Speciﬁcally, a model including

both is superior to models that exclude one of these terms: excluding phonological length

produces a ∆AI Cc of 28, and excluding duration gives a ∆AI Cc of 10. The precise inﬂuence of

both factors can be seen in ﬁg. 3. The line shows the estimated eﬀect, the shading the 95%

conﬁdence interval and the dots represent residuals. The vertical axis is reversed to ease the

interpretation of the ﬁgures in terms of the vowel space.


                                                20
                                                                                                                                                     //i//                                 //e//




                                                                                                                                   500
                                700




                                                                                                                                   750
Estimated F1 (reversed scale)




                                800




                                                                                                   Estimated F1 (reversed scale)
                                                                                                                                   1000




                                900                                                                                                                  //o//                                 //u//




                                                                                                                                   500

                                1000


                                                                                                                                   750



                                1100
                                                                                                                                   1000



                                          50           100              150             200                                                  Short           Long                  Short           Long
                                               Duration including preaspiration, msec                                                                               Vowel length

                                               (a) Eﬀect of duration                                                                      (b) Eﬀect of phonological length by vowel

                                                  Figure 3: Eﬀects of duration and phonological length, Sp1


                                   As ﬁg. 3a shows, longer duration generally corresponds to a lower value for F1, although

the eﬀect is highly non-linear. I interpret this as an eﬀect of undershoot: relatively short vow-

els are lower than the target. This is especially pronounced with vowels of greater duration

(presumably mostly phonologically long ones), but less visible at short durations. This eﬀect,

however, cannot account for the full range of variation in F1, with the category of phonolo-

gical length making a clear additional contribution (especially in the case of the mid vowels),

as seen in ﬁg. 3b.

                                   Thus, Sp1 exempliﬁes the vowel system in penultimate syllables seen in existing descrip-

tions of South Welsh. This speaker demonstrates a reliable distinction in duration between

vowels in phonologically ‘short’ and ‘long’ contexts, and a categorical distinction in quality

between the two classes. This applies to all the vowels that enter the length contrast, and

the quality distinction cannot be accounted for solely by undershoot. This is precisely the

phonologically ambiguous situation described in section 2.2.




                                                                                              21
                                                                     //i//                                      //e//
                                               2


                                               1
 Normalized duration including preaspiration




                                               0


                                               -1


                                               -2


                                                                    //o//                                       //u//
                                               2


                                               1


                                               0


                                               -1


                                               -2

                                                           Short              Long                    Short               Long
                                                                                       Vowel length


                                                           Figure 4: Vowel duration by category, south-western speakers


3.3.2                                               The south-western system

Six of the eight speakers exemplify the south-western system, where the quality of long mid

vowels depends on the phonological category of the post-tonic vowel. Figure 4 demonstrates

that all vowels show the expected diﬀerence in duration between the ‘short’ and ‘long’ con-

texts. (Durations have been normalized by converting to z-scores, with the mean duration of

all vowels, including post-tonic ones, taken as 0.) A two-way ANOVA with normalized dur-

ation as dependent variable again shows that both vowel length (F (1, 1699) = 744.85, p <

0.00001) and vowel quality (F (3, 1699) = 122.05, p < 0.00001) are signiﬁcant predictors of

duration.

                                                Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of vowel qualities by vowel duration, with formant

values Lobanov-normalized (i. e. converted to z-scores) by speaker (Adank, Smits & van Hout

2004). The plot shows long mid vowel tokens to be concentrated in two regions of the vowel

space: one with approximately the same quality as the corresponding short vowel and one




                                                                                         22
                                  Short vowels                            Long vowels
                 -2




                 -1
 Normalized F1




                                                                                                   Vowel quality
                 0                                                                                    //i//
                                                                                                      //e//
                                                                                                      //o//
                                                                                                      //u//




                 1




                 2



                          1         0            -1     -2            1     0           -1    -2
                                                      Normalized F2


                       Figure 5: Densities of vowels for the south-western group, by vowel length


corresponding to a higher, more peripheral vowel in the same region of the vowel space as

the long ‘tense’ vowels of Sp1.

                  The distribution of the lower (‘lax’) allophones of long mid vowels is consistent with the

descriptions: they appear, almost without exception, before a high vowel. (Due to the re-

strictions of the lexicon, the high vowel in the post-tonic syllable was always //i//.) There

is, however, at least one exception. The word ﬀenestr ‘window’ consistently has [ɛː] despite

the non-high vowel in the post-tonic syllable: [ˈfɛːnɛst(r)]. Most speakers produced all three

tokens of ﬀenestr in the task with a vowel with a normalized F1 of well above zero, even

though most other tokens of long //e// before a non-high vowel have negative normalized

F1. The exception is speaker Sp4, who always has tense [eː] here.⁴
    ⁴Recall that this is the speaker who was brought up in Cardiﬀ, and otherwise shows a south-western system.
Speculatively, this could be a case of incomplete dialect acquisition due to insuﬃcient input: having successfully
acquired the general rule, speaker Sp4 nevertheless may not have received enough input to acquire the lexical
exception.




                                                                23
    Given the highly consistent behaviour of ﬀenestr (but not any other lexical items) across

speakers, it seems likely that it is not an artefact of experimental conditions but a true lexical

exception. To take this into account, further modelling was conducted on the assumption

that the stressed vowel of ﬀenestr for all speakers except Sp4 falls within the same category

as other ‘lax’ long vowels.

    To identify the nature of the following vowel’s inﬂuence on the stressed vowel, we again

ﬁt several generalized additive mixed models, all with random intercepts for speaker and

word (see table 8 in the Appendix). The results show that the quality of the stressed vowel is

inﬂuenced by the high or non-high speciﬁcation on the post-tonic vowel. A model without

the height of the post-tonic vowel as a predictor fares worse than one that does. However, a

model with only a single ﬁxed eﬀect of post-tonic vowel height (i. e. consistent across vowel

quality and length speciﬁcations of the stressed vowel), does signiﬁcantly worse than one

with a three-way interaction between stressed vowel quality, stressed vowel length, and post-

tonic vowel height (∆AI Cc = 20).

    As table 8 shows, most of the eﬀect of the height of the post-tonic vowel is accounted

for by the mid stressed vowels — neither short vowels nor the long high vowels are aﬀected

by a post-tonic high vowel, exactly as the descriptions claim. The eﬀect of the post-tonic

high vowel essentially cancels out the raising eﬀect of phonological length, making the ‘lax’

long vowels identical to the corresponding short ones. For short //e// (i. e. [ɛ]) the estimated

eﬀect of vowel category is 1.58 standard deviations (relative to the F1 of [ɪ]), while for a long

lax //e// (i. e. [ɛː]) the sum of all relevant eﬀects is 1.55 SDs; for //o//, the corresponding

numbers are 1.54 for [ɔ] and 1.72 for [ɔː].

    The results of the acoustic study conﬁrm the existence of two qualitative categories

within most vowel pairs.⁵ Among high vowels, the distribution is identical to that found else-

where in Welsh: ‘lax’ [ɪ ʊ] are associated with phonological shortness, and ‘tense’ [i u] are

found in contexts requiring phonological length. The distribution of mid vowels is diﬀerent:

‘lax’ [ɛ ɔ] are associated with short contexts and with long contexts if there is a following high
    ⁵The exception is //u//, which does not show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in F1. However, further modelling
identiﬁes a robust diﬀerence between short and long //u// in F2; it is also probable that F3, not measured here,
contributes to this distinction.



                                                      24
vowel; ‘tense’ [e o] are found elsewhere in long contexts (before a non-high vowel and —

following traditional descriptions and Mayr & Davies 2011 — presumably in stressed ﬁnal

syllables).

   Modelling also allows us to exclude the hypothesis that the dissimilation is an artefact

of a continuous trade-oﬀ in duration between two neighbouring vowels. Such an explana-

tion has been proposed to account for height dissimilation phenomena (Crosswhite 2000),

and continuous trade-oﬀs along these lines has been identiﬁed in Kera (Pearce 2007) and

in dialectal Russian (Kniazev & Šaul’skij 2007). However, modelling with the duration of the

post-tonic vowel or its (normalized) F1 as the explanatory variable gives results inferior to

those with the phonological category of the post-tonic vowel as the chief factor: ∆AI Cc = 27

for normalized duration and ∆AI Cc = 32 for normalized F1. Thus, we are dealing with a cat-

egorical eﬀect of the following vowel’s height speciﬁcation on the quality of the stressed one,

rather than a continuous interaction. This justiﬁes treating the ‘mid vowel dissimilation’ as

a categorical process that, crucially, involves access to proprietary phonological informa-

tion — the featural speciﬁcation of the post-tonic vowel. Under modularist assumptions, this

presents clear evidence for the phonological nature of the distinction between the ‘tense’

and ‘lax’ variants, at least of the mid vowels.


3.3.3   The non-enhanced system

Finally, speaker Sp8, brought up in Aberystwyth in Mid Wales, apparently shows another

type of interaction between vowel quantity and quality. Like other speakers in the study,

Sp8 shows some diﬀerence in vowel duration between the ‘short’ and ‘long’ contexts, with

the exception of //u//. Unfortunately, the dataset for the single speaker is insuﬃciently

large for any deﬁnite pronouncements on statistical signiﬁcance. A two-way ANOVA with

vowel duration as dependent variable indicates that both phonological length (F (3, 276) =

50.38, p < 0.001) and vowel quality (F (1, 276) = 17.89, p < 0.001), as well as their interaction

(F (3, 276) = 6.41, p < 0.001) are signiﬁcant

   The existence of a quantitative distinction between short and long vowels in this variety

is further conﬁrmed by a distinction in the duration of post-tonic consonants, which are


                                                  25
                                                                              //i//                                 //e//
 Duration (including preaspiration for vowels), msec




                                                       200




                                                       100




                                                                                                                                       Type
                                                                                                                                         Vowel
                                                                              //o//                                 //u//
                                                                                                                                         Consonant




                                                       200




                                                       100




                                                                  Short               Long                  Short           Long
                                                                                             Vowel length


                                                                          Figure 6: Vowel and consonant duration by context, Sp8


longer after short vowels and shorter after long vowels, consistent with the moraic structure

postulated for South Welsh varieties in section 2.2. This is seen in ﬁg. 6.

                                                        Vowel quality shows a diﬀerent picture. Figure 7 demonstrates that ‘long’ and ‘short’ vow-

els occupy the same position in the vowel space (with the possible exception of //o//). It also

shows that a large number of tokens coded as short //o// are located in the same region as

tokens coded as //u//. This may be the result of a sound change, as the distribution of these

anomalous tokens of //o// appears to be at least some extent lexically driven. Those cases

where all tokens of a given word show an F1 value of under 400 Hz (unless this was the sole

representative of the item in this data set) were recoded for the purposes of modelling as

representing the category //u// rather than //o//. As the plot indicates, this is clearly not suf-

ﬁcient, as many tokens coded as //o// nevertheless clearly occupy much the same position

in the vowel space as tokens of //u//, but barring further investigation of relevant varieties

no other attempts to prejudge the categorization were made.

                                                        The results of modelling of the stressed vowel’s F1 as predicted by vowel quality, vowel

length, and their interactions are shown in table 9 in the Appendix. They conﬁrm that there

                                                                                                     26
                                    Short                                   Long




                 -2




                 -1
 Normalized F1




                                                                                                   Vowel quality
                                                                                                      //i//
                                                                                                      //e//
                 0                                                                                    //o//
                                                                                                      //u//




                 1




                 2


                       2       1        0      -1      -2       2     1        0        -1    -2
                                                    Normalized F2


                                        Figure 7: Density plot for vowel quality, Sp8


is no signiﬁcant eﬀect of phonological length on the quality of the stressed vowel, in contrast

to the standard southern system. Adding duration as a predictor improves model ﬁt (∆AI Cc =

14). Speciﬁcally, increased vowel duration gives a higher F1, i. e. a lower vowel (ﬁg. 8; as with

ﬁg. 3, the y axis is reversed).

                  The variation in the quality of stressed vowels in this system is not sensitive to phonolo-

gical factors, notably length, that are so prominent in other varieties of Welsh. In fact, the

raising eﬀect of shorter duration seen in ﬁg. 8 is consistent with undershoot of a relatively

low target: the target qualities of at least the mid vowels for this speaker are in the region of

other speakers’ [ɛ ɔ], even when the vowels are phonologically long and have long duration.

This clearly contrasts with Sp1, where undershoot produces relatively low vowels (ﬁg. 3).

                  Subject to further investigation, I tentatively conclude that speaker Sp8 exempliﬁes a vari-

ety of Welsh without a robust distinction in quality between long and short stressed vowels

(at least in penultimate syllables), with all mid vowels being ‘lax’ in quality.

                                                              27
                                 400




                                 600
 Estimated F1 (reversed scale)




                                 800




                                 1000




                                                   50                        100                            150         200
                                                                   Duration including preaspiration, msec


                                                        Figure 8: Eﬀect of vowel duration on F1, Sp8


                                  It is not clear whether such a system has been described in detail before in Welsh. Pilch

1957 presents an auditory study based on the speech of a single informant from Bow Street,

a village 3.5 miles outside Aberystwyth. Although no explicit statement of the distribution

of ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ vowels is given, at least for the mid vowels the distribution appears to

be ‘tense when long in a stressed monosyllable and pretonically, lax otherwise’: [ˈmɛðɪɡ]

meddyg ‘doctor’ vs. [meˈðəɡɔn] meddygon ‘doctors’, [ˈhen] hen ‘old’. Pilch (1957) does not,

however, write length unless it has ‘s-phonemic’ function: thus, in his transcriptions the min-

imal pair ton ‘wave’ vs. tôn ‘tune’ is written [tʰɔn] vs. [tʰon], even though the latter presum-

ably has a long vowel. Hence, it is not clear whether his <mɛðɪɡ> corresponds to the [ˈmɛːðɪɡ]

expected for Sp8.

                                  The situation is diﬀerent in the description of the dialect of (rural) north-west Ceredigion

by Lewis (1960). He conﬁrms that there is no length distinction in the penultimate syllables

in this variety: [ˈtʰɔn] ton ‘wave’ and [ˈtʰoːn] tôn ‘tune’ are distinct, but the plurals tonnau

                                                                                   28
and tonau are not. However, according to Lewis (1960) the realization of vowels in penul-

timate syllables shows ‘free variation’ between a half-long tense vowel (followed by a short

consonant) and a short lax vowel (followed by a long consonant): [ˈtʰoːnɛ̝] ∼ [ˈtʰɔnːɛ]. In ﬁnal

stressed syllables, the system described by Lewis (1960) is identical to the standard one for

mid vowels, but, interestingly, he does not describe a quality diﬀerence between short and

long high vowels even in stressed ﬁnal syllables. Thus, although there are suggestive simil-

arities between the system shown by Sp8 and those discussed by Pilch (1957), Lewis (1960),

it appears that so far the pattern discussed here cannot be identiﬁed with another pattern

described in the literature without further research.


3.3.4   Unstressed syllables

Finally, we turn to qualitative diﬀerences in post-tonic, unstressed syllables. As noted in sec-

tion 2.1.3, previous descriptions lead us to expect no ‘s-phonemic’ contrast in that position:

the quality of the unstressed vowel is predictable, if sometimes variable. The distribution

depends at least partly on syllable structure, with, for instance, high vowels always tense in

ﬁnal open syllables and always lax in ﬁnal closed syllables.

    If we accept the suggestion in section 2.2 that short vowels in stressed syllables precede

moraic codas, then this distribution is in fact very similar to the distribution in stressed syl-

lables: tense vowels are obligatory in open syllables, whether stressed (and thus phonologic-

ally long) or post-tonic (where the phonological quantity contrast is neutralized), while lax

vowels are possible only in closed syllables (whether stressed or unstressed). The nature of

the eﬀect is open to question: given that vowels in closed syllables are commonly shorter

than those in open ones, it could be due to duration rather than syllable structure.

    The acoustic study allows us to conduct a preliminary examination of post-tonic vowels.

A subset of the words were coded as containing a ‘closed’ or ‘open’ ﬁnal syllable⁶ and further

models were ﬁtted to this data set.

    Figure 9 shows (normalized) vowel quality in ﬁnal syllables by syllable type. It indicates

that the descriptions are largely, but not entirely, correct. There is obvious separation in the
    ⁶Some items were disregarded, in particular those ending in [ð] or [v], which are prone to variable deletion.
In all, there were 32 items coded as having a ﬁnal open syllable and 68 items with a closed ﬁnal syllable.


                                                      29
                                   Closed                                Open




                 -1




                 0
                                                                                                Post-tonic vowel
 Normalized F1




                                                                                                   //a//
                                                                                                   //e//
                                                                                                   //i//
                                                                                                   //o//
                                                                                                   //u//
                 1




                 2




                           1        0       -1       -2           1      0        -1       -2
                                                  Normalized F2


                         Figure 9: Normalized vowel quality, by ﬁnal syllable type, all speakers


case of the high vowels //i// and //u//, with signiﬁcantly centralized quality in closed syl-

lables, but no clear distinction among the non-low vowels. This is shown in ﬁg. 13 in the

Appendix, plotting the estimated values of normalized F1 in a model that includes an inter-

action of vowel quality and syllable type (open or closed) in postvocalic syllables, as well as

normalized duration, normalized F2, and random intercept by speaker as independent vari-

ables: as the ﬁgure shows, the 95% conﬁdence intervals for vowels in open or closed syllables

do not overlap for //i// and //u//, but do overlap for other vowels.

                  Thus, if the picture painted by the present data set is representative, the sources appear

to be imprecise when they describe the realization of //e o// in ﬁnal syllables as variable.

Instead of a stochastic choice between ‘lax’ [ɛ ɔ] and ‘tense’ [e o], or a phonetic continuum

with the ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ qualities as endpoints, we observe unimodal distributions in the

case of the mid vowels. Moreover, the F1 values of these posttonic //e o// are very close to



                                                             30
the F1 values for the corresponding short stressed vowels. Thus, we can tentatively conclude

that post-tonic mid vowels are realized as [ɛ ɔ] in both closed and open syllables.

      Since the conditions in post-tonic syllables were not controlled in this study, it is too early

to give signiﬁcant credence to the quantitative results reported here, even if the diﬀerence in

the magnitude of the eﬀects is highly suggestive. Further research is required to fully verify

the hypotheses.


3.4     Summary

To summarize, the acoustic study has demonstrated the existence of three diﬀerent types of

interaction between vowel quantity and vowel quality:

      • The ‘standard southern’ system: robust phonetic distinction between ‘tense’ and ‘lax’

        vowels driven by phonological length, with an unclear phonological signiﬁcance;⁷

      • The ‘south-western’ system: robust distinction between ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ vowels driven

        by phonological length and phonological speciﬁcation of neighbouring vowels, and

        thus available to the phonological grammar;

      • Provisionally, the ‘non-enhanced’ system: phonological length distinction expressed

        via duration, but no robust qualitative distinction.

      In post-tonic syllables, high vowels are obligatorily tense in open syllables and lax in

closed ones; mid (and low) vowels show no inﬂuence from syllable structure, in all systems.

Although in general terms the distribution of the allophones is similar, we can highlight the

following diﬀerences between the systems:

      • In the standard southern system, all long vowels are tense. Word-ﬁnal high vowels are

        also tense;

      • In the south-western system, tense vowels are either long or word-ﬁnal, and restricted

        to a subset of open syllables; not all long vowels are tense;
    ⁷This conclusion must be slightly tentative given that only a single speaker in this data set represents this
system. However, given the weight of available evidence for this type of patterning, including the quantitative
study by Mayr & Davies (2011), it seems reasonable to conclude that this state of aﬀairs is general.


                                                       31
      • In the non-enhanced system, tenseness is found only word-ﬁnally, for a subset of vow-

        els. Mid vowels are never tense. However, the situation in monosyllables is unclear.


      In the next section I oﬀer a phonological interpretation of these patterns of cross-

dialectal diversity.



4      Analysis

This cross-dialectal variation requires a phonological analysis, with particular reference to

the exact status of the ‘tenseness’ distinction. The acoustic study allows us to establish the

categorical nature of the ‘tenseness’ distinction in the standard southern system; however,

its phonological status can only be established with reference to a concrete analysis. To ap-

proach such an analysis, we begin with the south-western system, where the phonological

status of the distinction is more secure.


4.1     The south-western system

As discussed above, I take the results of the acoustic study reported in section 3.3 to mean

that the co-incidence of vowel tenseness and length in these varieties of Welsh is due to a

phonological pattern, because the distinction is categorical (rather than continuously de-

pendent on the duration of the vowel) and sensitive to phonological information. Speciﬁc-

ally, the distribution is as follows:


      • High vowels are tense in open syllables and lax in closed syllables, irrespective of stress

        and length;

(11)    Tense high vowels

        a. [.ˈkʰliː.dɔ.] cludo    ‘to move’

        b. [.ˈhɛð.li.]   heddlu ‘police’

        c. [.ˈtʰiː.]     tŷ       ‘house’




                                                 32
(12)   Lax high vowels

       a. [.ˈhʊn.nu.] hwnnw ‘that’

       b. [.ˈmɔd.rɪb.] modryb ‘aunt’

       c. [.ˈtʰʊpʰ.]       twp        ‘stupid’


   • Mid vowels are lax irrespective of syllable structure, unless they are long and not fol-

       lowed by a high vowel:

(13)   Tense mid vowels

       a. [.ˈseː.rɛn.] seren          ‘star’

       b. [.ɡloː.]         glo        ‘coal’


(14)   Lax mid vowels

       a. [.ˈmɛː.ðʊl] meddwl ‘to think’

       b. [.ˈɛb.rɪɬ]       Ebrill     ‘April’

       c. [.ˈneː.ɡɛs] neges           ‘message’

       d. [.ˈboː.rɛ.]      bore       ‘morning’

       e. [.ˈpʰɛn.]        pen        ‘head’


   • To complete the picture, we should discuss the vowel [ə]. It is not found in ﬁnal syl-

       lables.⁸ In penultimate stressed syllables, it is always short, and hence requires a mo-

       raic coda: [ˈkʰəvˑan] cyfan ‘all’. It is also impossible in hiatus. In other words, the schwa

       only appears in closed syllables, fully patterning in this respect with high lax vowels [ɪ]

       and [ʊ].

   Hence, accounting for the distribution of tense and lax vowels in this system requires ref-

erence not just to the featural speciﬁcations of neighbouring vowels but also to syllabic struc-

ture (the presence of a coda) and moraic structure more speciﬁcally (vowel length). This is
   ⁸Exceptions are function words like fy ‘my’, y(r) ‘the’ (plausibly proclitics), and borrowings like syr ‘sir’.


                                                         33
clearly proprietary phonological information, and hence by the modularity criterion laid out

in section 1.2 the ‘tenseness’ speciﬁcations of these vowels are also phonological by nature.

In other words, both the acoustic data (categoricity) and the details of the distribution (refer-

ence to moraic structure) converge on an analysis where pairs such as [e] and [ɛ] are distinct

in the phonological grammar. Such distinctions are normally encoded via featural structure.


4.1.1    The featural analysis of tenseness

To address the exact featural diﬀerence between [i] and [ɪ] or [e] and [ɪ], I draw on the major

insight of contrastivist approaches to phonology, which seeks evidence for featural speciﬁca-

tions primarily in the grammatical behaviour of the relevant segments and not (just) in their

phonetic properties. As noted in section 1.3, I implement this in a substance-free framework

with emergent features (e. g. Mielke 2008, Morén 2006, Blaho 2008, Odden 2013). In this ap-

proach, features do not have intrinsic phonetic content, highlighting the fact that they are

arbitrary labels useful for designating sets of segments that show similar phonological beha-

viour, but without any claim to a one-to-one phonology-phonetics mapping.

   In such a framework, we cannot assume that all pairs entering the ‘tenseness’ contrasts

diﬀer by the same feature. In fact, a closer analysis shows that ‘tenseness’ behaves diﬀerently

in the high and mid vowel subinventories in south-western Welsh.

   In mid vowels, the necessary condition on the presence of tenseness is bimoraicity. Bimo-

raicity itself is only possible in the absence of a coda, but this is an incidental generalization

unrelated to vowel quality. However, this condition is not suﬃcient: some long mid vowels

are still lax. Moreover, the ‘tense’ speciﬁcation of mid vowels interacts with featural speciﬁc-

ations of other vowels, speciﬁcally with their height. Crucially, the tenseness of the post-tonic

vowels is irrelevant: both tense and lax high vowels trigger laxing of a stressed mid vowel:


(15)    a. [ˈɡɛːlɪn]   gelyn    ‘enemy’

        b. [ˈhɛːdi]    heddiw ‘today’

   High vowels (and [ə]), on the other hand, show a symmetric patterning of tense-lax pairs

driven solely by syllable structure and only coincidentally related to length thanks to open


                                               34
                     Segment       [coronal]     [dorsal]     [lax]   [open]      [closed]
                     /i/               ✓                                              ✓
                     /ɪ/               ✓                        ✓                     ✓
                     /u/                                                              ✓
                     /ʊ/                                        ✓                     ✓
                     /ə/               ✓             ✓          ✓                     ✓
                     /e/               ✓                                 ✓            ✓
                     /ɛ/               ✓
                     /o/                             ✓                                ✓
                     /ɔ/                             ✓
                     /a/                                                 ✓

                  Table 2: Featural speciﬁcations for vowels: South-West Welsh


syllable lengthening: lax vowels are impossible in open syllables (some of which are bimo-

raic), and tense vowels are impossible in closed syllables. There is little evidence for the in-

teraction of this distinction with any other element of the phonological grammar.

    If we start from emergentist, substance-free assumptions that require phonological,

ideally positive, evidence before assigning a common feature to a set of segments, it is ap-

parent that the assumption of a single ‘tenseness’ feature covering all four non-low pairs

in Welsh (and the unpaired [ə]) is unfounded. Moreover, and perhaps even more seriously,

common universal feature systems are unable to describe the relevant phonological classes:

for instance, the class of segments excluded from open syllables — [ɪ ʊ ə] — cannot be de-

scribed by a conjunction of features that excludes [ɛ ɔ] in common systems such as that of

Jakobson, Fant & Halle (1951) or Chomsky & Halle (1967);⁹ it is even more diﬃcult to express

in featural terms the connection between mid vowel tenseness and the height of the follow-

ing vowel.

    Instead, I propose that the vowel patterns of South-West Welsh can be accounted for us-

ing the emergent featural speciﬁcations shown in table 2. For concreteness, I use privative

features with vaguely phonetic labels reminiscent of versions of Uniﬁed Feature Theory (Cle-

ments & Hume 1995); it is important to remember, however, that since the featural theory

assumed here is substance-free, the labels do not lay claim to inherent phonetic content
    ⁹The phonological class /ɪ ʊ ə/ appears to be rare cross-linguistically: the PBase database (Mielke 2008) con-
tains one example (Punjabi) of a pattern exclusively involving these vowels.



                                                       35
(thus, for example, the co-occurrence of [open] and [closed] in [e] is not meant to represent

a paradox like the co-occurrence of [+high] and [+low] in some theories). For reasons of

space and focus, I do not present an explicit account of how the speciﬁcations in table 2 are

manipulated by the grammar to produce the patterns; they can be quite straightforwardly

implemented in a rule-based or OT formalism.

    This system can be justiﬁed as follows:

    • The feature [closed] covers segments implicated in the height dissimilation pattern,

      namely all high vowels (its triggers) and the ‘tense’ mid vowels [e] and [o];

    • The feature [lax] covers the class [ɪ ʊ ə] banned from open syllables;

    The distribution of ‘tenseness’ vis-à-vis length is largely accounted for by restrictions on

[closed] and [lax]. The [lax] vowels [ɪ ʊ ə] cannot be long, because they are always found in

closed syllables. The mid ‘lax’ vowels [ɛ] and [ɔ] do not fall within the scope of this general-

ization — correctly, as they are found in open syllables in this variety of Welsh (example 15).

In fact, the system in table 2 implies that the markedness relationships of tense and lax vow-

els are reversed in high and mid subinventories: among the high vowels, lax [ɪ ʊ] are more

marked (they bear the extra feature [lax]), and among the mid vowels, tense [e o] are more

marked (they bear the extra feature [closed]).

    In the high subinventory, this can be justiﬁed because the lax [ɪ ʊ ə] are associated with

the more cross-linguistically marked context of closed syllables. We can think of the oblig-

atory laxing of vowels in this context as a in instance of licensing: it is common in privative

feature theories to assume that marked elements can only be retained in the presence of

some additional material, and in this case [lax] licenses the coda.

    As for the mid subinventory, in order to understand the markedness relationships

between the sets [e o] and [ɛ ɔ], we need to determine the direction of the mid vowel tense-

ness alternation. Does the alternation in [ˈkʰɔːdi] codi ‘rise’ vs. [ˈkʰoːdɔð] cododd ‘(s)he rose’

reﬂect an underlying /ɔ/ raised before a non-high vowel or an underlying /o/ lowered before

a high one?¹⁰
   ¹⁰A reviewer rightly suggests a third possibility, namely that the underlying vowel is featurally identical to
neither surface allophone. Particularly with binary features, one could, for instance, imagine an underspeciﬁed


                                                       36
    I suggest that the word ﬀenestr ‘window’, consistently realized with [ɛː] rather than the

expected [eː] before a non-high vowel, provides a clue. Rather than being arbitrarily marked

as exceptional, it could indicate that the phonological grammar fails to raise an input mid

lax vowel, ensuring a faithful mapping in terms of quality even if the vowel is contextually

lengthened. This analysis is, of course, also consistent with the possibility of long lax [ɛː ɔː]

in English borrowings, discussed in section 2.2. Thus, alternations in codi ∼ cododd are ex-

amples of lowering, or deletion of [closed] in the presence of another instance of this feature

within a ﬁnal disyllabic domain; the domain could be, for instance, an uneven trochaic (H́L)

foot.

    This deletion gives the expected result when applied to /o/. Deletion of [closed] from /e/

results in the disallowed segment {[coronal], [open]}, so [open] is further deleted to produce

[ɛ]. In the high vowels, which are all [closed], deletion of this feature would produce disal-

lowed segments in the case of /i/, /ɪ/, and /ʊ/; and the empty segment (presumably also

disallowed) in the case of /u/, and therefore can be straightforwardly blocked.

    I take the existence of the form [ˈfɛːnɛst] (and possibly also English borrowings) as in-

dicating that there is no obligatory raising of long lax mid vowels, at least in monosyllables.

Given that long mid vowels are (apparently) obligatorily tense in forms with ﬁnal stress like

[ˈheːn] hen ‘old’, this requires us to posit either a tensing process somehow restricted to ﬁnal

stressed syllables, or to admit a lexical gap, i. e. the absence of lexical items of the shape /hɛn/

that would map to a surface [ˈhɛːn], as opposed to input /hen/, crucially with a [closed] /e/

that lengthens. The latter is not in fact entirely unattractive, because a diachronic explana-

tion for the gap is readily available: if mid long vowels in ﬁnal closed syllables are originally

tense, there is no historical process by which they would become lax, and so the gap is simply

due to the vagaries of history.¹¹

    The relatively unrestricted patterning of [ɛ] and [ɔ] contrasts with the fact that [e] and

[o] are subject to a further requirement. They are only allowed to surface when bimoraic:
vowel and a feature-ﬁlling process. With unary features, this option is less appealing as the less marked vowel
essentially is the underspeciﬁed correspondent. In the absence of strong positive evidence for setting up a third
vowel category this option does not seem to have obvious advantages.
   ¹¹See also Iosad 2017 for more evidence that historically long vowels in Welsh can enter an underlying (‘m-
phonemic’) tenseness contrast.



                                                      37
                               Stressed                                   Unstressed
                     Short                   Long                Closed                Open
    Input    Output     Pattern     Output     Pattern     Output    Pattern    Output   Pattern
    ɪʊ          ɪʊ                    iu            OST¹    ɪʊ                    iu      OST
    iu          ɪʊ           CSL²     iu                    ɪʊ        CSL         iu
    eo          ɛɔ           SVL³     eo                    ɛɔ        SVL         ɛɔ          SVL
                                      ɛɔ            HD⁴
    ɛɔ          ɛɔ                    ɛɔ                    ɛɔ                    ɛɔ
                                     (e o)      (FLT)⁵
    ¹ Open syllable tensing: ɪ ʊ → i u / in any open syllable
    ² Close syllable laxing: i u → ɪ ʊ / in any closed syllable
    ³ Short vowel laxing: e o → ɛ ɔ / when monomoraic
    ⁴ Height dissimilation: e o → ɛ ɔ / before [closed] vowel
    ⁵ Final long vowel tensing: ɛ ɔ → e o / in a ﬁnal stressed syllable

             Table 3: Input-output mappings in a grammar of South-West Welsh


mid vowels are obligatorily lax in unstressed syllables and in stressed syllables with moraic

codas. This patterning asymmetry further supports the proposition that the ‘tense’ vowels

[e o] are more marked than the ‘lax’ [ɛ ɔ], in a reversal of the situation observed in the high

subinventory.

   The phonological grammar of tenseness and laxness in South-Western Welsh is summar-

ized in table 3. It shows various types of potential inputs in diﬀerent contexts, and any rules

(or, in OT parlance, unfaithful mappings) that are required to eﬀect the necessary changes.

As discussed above, it is not clear whether input [ɛ ɔ] become [e o] when long in a ﬁnal syl-

lable.


4.1.2    Other phonological processes

Apart from the grammar of tenseness and laxness, the proposed featural speciﬁcations

should also be consistent with other morphophonological alternations in Welsh. These tend

to involve the coarser vowel categories (i. e.//i//, //u// etc.). The most important phenom-

ena are the following (Iosad 2012, Hannahs 2013):




                                                     38
    • ‘Vowel mutation’: /ə/ is realized as //i// in a ﬁnal syllable; this neutralization can be

        analysed as deletion of [dorsal] (and [lax] if necessary because of syllable structure) to

        produce //i//;¹²

    • ‘Vowel mutation’ in some varieties also encompasses the alternation between the diph-

        thong [ai] in a ﬁnal syllable and [ei] in a non-ﬁnal one: [ˈbraiχ] braich ‘hand’ ∼ [ˈbreiχɛ]

        breichiau ‘hands’, analysed as spreading of [coronal] from the glide to the nucleus of

        the diphtong;

    • Finally, an underlying [ɔ] in some stressed monosyllables alternates with [ə], or [ɪ]

        where schwa is excluded from this context: [ˈfɔn] ﬀon ‘stick’, pl. [ˈfən] or [ˈfɪn] ﬀyn; Iosad

        (2012) analyses this is as addition of a ﬂoating [coronal], and uses this evidence for the

        analysis of //ə// as the union of the features of //o// and //i//.

    The present proposal preserves in the main the analysis in Iosad (2012); I refer to that

work for detailed justiﬁcation. The speciﬁcations are consistent with a substance-free ap-

proach in that they refer only to phonological patterning: for instance, //o// and //u// do

not share features, in contrast to an approach where they would share a colour speciﬁcation,

because they do not act as a class in any phonological pattern of Welsh.


4.1.3    The feature analysis and the contrastive hierarchy

I will now discuss how the present analysis is relevant to the Contrastivist Hypothesis. In par-

ticular, what is the import of contrastivism if phonological representations are constructed

‘from the bottom up’, on the basis of the inventory of categorically distinct units and their

behaviour in the grammar? One could imagine that if there is enough evidence for phonolo-

gical activity of redundant distinctions, then this could defeat the Contrastivist Hypothesis

(cf. Blaho 2008: §1.2.2).

    Indeed, the emphasis in much contrastivist practice has been on identifying the proper

assignment of a closed set of universal features, and Hall (2011) in particular presents a de-

fence of this approach over emergent-feature theories in a contrastivist context. However,
    ¹²Traditionally ‘vowel mutation’ also encompasses the alternation between ﬁnal-syllable [u] and non-ﬁnal
[ə], but see Iosad 2012 for arguments that this is not a phonological pattern in Modern Welsh.


                                                    39
                                           iɪəuʊeɛoɔa


                                   uʊoɔa                          [coronal]
                                                                   iɪəeɛ
                          ɔa                   [closed]
                                                 uʊo                  ɛ        [closed]
                                                                                 iɪəe
                 [open]    [dorsal]
                    a         ɔ           uo              [lax]
                                                            ʊ         iɪə             [open]
                                                                                         e
                                      u   [dorsal]
                                             o                    i           [lax]
                                                                               ɪə


                                                                          ɪ     [dorsal]
                                                                                   ə

                   Figure 10: Contrastive hierarchy for South-West Welsh


both Cowper & Hall (2014) and Dresher (2014) suggest that emergent features are compatible

with contrastivism, as long as the foundational importance of contrast is also recognized.

   Here, I follow the latter line of inquiry, and suggest that the Contrastivist Hypothesis can

be made contentful in the context of emergent features by restating it as a condition on in-

ventories. Speciﬁcally, I suggest that a set of featural speciﬁcations in an inventory is con-

sistent with the Contrastivist Hypothesis if there exists a contrastive hierarchy constructed

in line with the Successive Division Algorithm (SDA; Dresher 2009) that assigns that set of

speciﬁcations to that inventory.

   Brieﬂy, the Successive Division Algorithm takes an inventory and uses some feature F to

divide it into two subinventories depending on whether they bear F (or [+F ] and [−F ] values,

in the binary version), and then recursively repeats that procedure with diﬀerent features,

stopping when a subinventory consists of a single segment. This guarantees lack of redund-

ancy: the algorithm only assigns a feature to a segment if it contributes to distinguishing it

from some other segment. However, the SDA is not fully deterministic: the set of features

used in a particular language, and the order of subdivisions, are subject to cross-linguistic

variation.

                                                 40
      Successive division can be applied to both binary and unary features. Figure 10 shows

a contrastive hierarchy corresponding to the inventory of South-West Welsh proposed in

table 2. It has been constructed following the version of the SDA for privative features de-

scribed by Hall (2007), with one non-trivial diﬀerence.

      Hall’s (2007) SDA for privative features guarantees that one of the segments in the invent-

ory remains featurally empty, because every cut produces a subinventory where no feature is

assigned. I suggest that the presence of such an empty segment is a matter of cross-linguistic

variation. It may well be that in some languages there is strong evidence for such empty seg-

ments in the phonological grammar. However, it is also possible that no evidence is avail-

able for a featurally empty segment: for instance, even if it is theoretically possible in inputs,

the grammar may insist on always inserting some features to neutralize it with another seg-

ment. I suggest that in such cases the empty segment’s place in the contrastive hierarchy

may be occupied by another segment speciﬁed for a single feature, with the restriction that

this feature is also used elsewhere in the hierarchy. Such features are deemed to be available,

because they, as our formulation of the Contrastivist Hypothesis has it, are still necessary to

distinguish (some other) phonemes of the language. If a feature were only assigned to this

isolated segment, it cannot be said to be necessary, as the segment would still be distinct if

it remained unspeciﬁed.

      In the case of South-Welsh Welsh, I suggest the segment is [a] and the feature is [open],

which is also assigned to [e] fully in line with the algorithm. With this amendment, the invent-

ory of South-West Welsh proposed in table 2 is consistent with the Contrastivist Hypothesis

and allows us to successfully account for the behaviour of the categories ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ this

variety.


4.2     The standard southern system

Applying the criteria for phonological status used in the previous section to the standard

southern system shows that the set of categories active in the phonological grammar is es-

sentially identical to that in the south-west. The high vowels //i// and //u// show the same

sensitivity to syllable structure — tense in open syllables, lax in closed syllables. Thus, the


                                                41
[i]/[ɪ] and [u]/[ʊ] distinctions are visible to the phonology. The markedness reasoning also

carries over unchanged: [ɪ] and [ʊ] are more marked than [i] and [u].

   The status of ‘tenseness’ in mid vowels is less clear. The distinction interacts with moraic

structure, so by the modularity criterion its phonological status is assured. However, there

are fewer cues to its featural content, since it is not involved in interactions with other seg-

ments. Yet there is an important diﬀerence between the standard southern and the south-

western system: in the latter, mid vowels are bimoraic if they are tense; in the former, mid

vowels are bimoraic if and only if they are tense. Thus, the argument from restricted distri-

bution cannot be used to decide whether ‘tense’ or ‘lax’ mid vowels are more marked, as the

restrictions are symmetrical.

   One could reason that the mid tense vowels are more marked, since they are associated

with the marked context of bimoraicity (much as lax high vowels are marked because they

are associated with the marked context of closed syllables). Although such arguments are

not particularly decisive, by parity of reasoning I adopt the solution whereby in high vowels

it is the lax member that bears an extra feature, and in mid vowels it is the tense member.

In any case, as in the south-western system, there does not appear to be positive phonolo-

gical evidence for treating the ‘tenseness’ distinction in the mid and high vowels as instan-

tiating the same contrast. Table 4 lays out the proposed analysis, with speciﬁcations for the

south-western system from table 2 added in grey for comparison. Note that although I use

the same feature labels as in preceding section, no phonetic identity or similarity is neces-

sarily implied.

   It is worth noting the diﬀerence is the speciﬁcation of [a], which only has the feature

[tense], whereas in the south-western system it is [open]. The reason is the diﬀerent scope

of [closed], which only singles out high vowels (and [ə]) in the latter, but does some of the

work of [tense] in the former: essentially, in the standard southern system [tense] does the

work that [closed] cannot do because there is no phonological relationship between /e o/

on the one hand and high vowels on the other. This has a desirable consequence: if [a] is

[tense], then the low vowel is expected not to support the tenseness distinction, agreeing




                                              42
            Segment     [coronal]   [dorsal]   [lax]    [closed]   [tense]   [open]
            /i/            ✓                               ✓
                           ✓                               ✓
            /ɪ/            ✓                        ✓      ✓
                           ✓                        ✓      ✓
            /u/                                            ✓
                                                           ✓
            /ʊ/                                            ✓
                                                    ✓      ✓
            /ə/            ✓           ✓            ✓      ✓
                           ✓           ✓            ✓      ✓
            /e/            ✓                                         ✓
                           ✓                               ✓                   ✓
            /ɛ/            ✓
                           ✓
            /o/                        ✓                             ✓
                                       ✓                   ✓
            /ɔ/                        ✓
                                       ✓
            /a/                                                      ✓
                                                                               ✓

            Table 4: Featural representations for the standard southern system


with the instrumental data available so far: as noted in section 2.1, no instrumental study

has yet corroborated the claims of a qualitative diﬀerence between short and long vowels.

   Figure 11 shows a contrastive hierarchy, drawn up on the same principles as that in the

previous section and compatible with the speciﬁcations in table 4.

   Thus, despite the essentially identical surface inventory, the ‘south-western’ and ‘stand-

ard southern’ systems diﬀer both in representation (i. e. featural speciﬁcations) and compu-

tation (i. e. the patterns and rankings that account for them). This supports the position of

emergent feature theory, where the symbolic representation of very similar phonetic phe-

nomena can vary cross-linguistically and must be discovered with reference to patterns of

distribution and alternation.




                                               43
                                              iɪəuʊeɛoɔa


                                  eɛoɔa                            [closed]
                                                                    iɪəuʊ
                         aoɔ                 [cor]
                                              eɛ              uʊ        [coronal]
                                                                           iɪə
                   [tense]       [dor]
                      a           oɔ     ɛ     [tense]    u    [lax]
                                                  e              ʊ        i       [lax]
                                                                                   ɪə
                             ɔ     [tense]
                                      o
                                                                              ɪ      [dor]
                                                                                       ə

               Figure 11: Contrastive hierarchy for the standard southern system


4.3     Featural analysis: summary

The cross-dialectal investigation of quantity-quality interaction in Welsh vowels demon-

strates non-trivial cross-dialectal divergences in inventories, the phonological interpreta-

tion of very similar phonetic contrasts, and phonological grammars. In all cases, the most

important diﬀerences concern the status of ‘tenseness’.

      In the standard southern system, the tenseness distinction covers all vowels (except [ə]

and [a]), but it does not create a surface (‘s-phonemic’) contrast, and there is little positive

phonological evidence to connect this distinction in high vowels with the one in mid vowels.

      By contrast, in the south-western system the distinction interacts with other features,

which provides some evidence as to its nature within the context of the broader grammar.

Moreover, in this system ‘tenseness’ is not just phonologized, but also phonemicized (Hy-

man 1976): it appears to be necessary in underlying representations to account for forms

like [ˈfɛːnɛst] ‘window’. In the next section I discuss the role of the phonologization process

in creating these situations.




                                                     44
5    Phonologization, redundancy, and the Contrastivist Hypothesis

We can now return to the question of whether assigning a phonological ‘tenseness’ speciﬁc-

ation to Welsh vowels is consistent with the Contrastivist Hypothesis, using the criteria in

section 1.2. To recap, we established the following:

    • The set of Welsh phonological patterns P contains categorical patterns involving pro-

      prietary phonological entities such as syllables;

    • It is possible to envisage a set of Welsh phonemes PH where ‘tense’/‘lax’ pairs such as

      /e/ and /ɛ/ are treated as separate phonemes;

    • It is possible to use a version of the Successive Division Algorithm to assign a set of non-

      redundant speciﬁcations for PH using the feature set F (that includes, in this case, the

      features [tense] and [lax]);

    • All patterns in P make crucial reference to features that are present in F.

    Under these criteria, then, Welsh ‘tenseness’ does not present a counterexample to the

Contrastivist Hypothesis even if quality is also treated as phonologically relevant. This result

stands in stark distinction to the traditional analysis that must designate ‘tenseness’ as an

allophonic phenomenon.

    The key to the disconnect between the various understanding of contrastiveness lies in

the life cycle of phonological processes, and speciﬁcally in the process of phonologization.

Phonologization represents not so much a change in the observed patterns as a change in

their interpretation by the learner. At least in the early stages of phonologization the distribu-

tion of newly created categories adheres very closely to the original phonetic conditioning,

and thus appears to be ‘allophonic’ under traditional criteria. This is shown in ﬁg. 12.

    Before phonologization, the grammar maps an input category /α / to a single category

[α ] in the surface phonological representation. However, enhancement (or other phonetic

implementation processes) maps that output category [α ] to several distinct regions in the

phonetic space (contexts A and B). After phonologization, the grammar includes rules map-

ping input /α / to [α ] in context A but to [ β ] in context B, with attendant implementation

                                               45
        Phonology: input              Phonology: output                      Phonetics

            Context A                      Context A                     t   Context A
                                                                    cemen
                           grammar                         enhan
                                                           enha
                                                                n  ceme
            Context B                      Context B                   nt    Context B
               /α /                             [α ]
                                      (a) Before phonologization

        Phonology: input             Phonology: output                       Phonetics
                                                   implementation
            Context A            a r    Context  A                           Context A
                           gramm
                                            [α ]
                           gramm
                                 ar
            Context B                      Context B                         Context B
                                                     implementation
               /α /                          [ β]
                                      (b) After phonologization

        Figure 12: Phonology-phonetics relationships before and after phonologization


mechanisms for [α ] and [ β ]. In both cases, input phonological /α / corresponds to a similar

distribution of the phonetic variants, but the underlying mechanism has changed.

    In the case of Welsh ‘tenseness’, the original ‘enhancement’ mechanism is the raising

of long vowels, still apparently absent in (parts of) the ‘non-enhanced’ system. This raising

must have originally been a pure implementation eﬀect. In the standard southern system,

however, this implementation eﬀect coexists with its phonological congener, a categorical

tensing rule for long vowels — an example of what Bermúdez-Otero (2015) calls ‘rule scatter-

ing’.

    This framework requires the phonological computation to be able to create fully predict-

able (‘allophonic’) distributions of phonological symbols (such as segments) and thus break

the link between phonological status and predictability. Indeed, just such a requirement has

been at the heart of objections to the taxonomic phoneme — and hence to a privileged role

for contrast in phonology since at least Bloomﬁeld 1939. Here, I suggest that even if we recog-

nize that phonological computation can enforce such predictable distributions, a contrast-




                                                 46
ivist approach provides a strong and useful restriction on inventory structure if it is reframed

with reference to non-redundant speciﬁcation implemented with a contrastive hierarchy.

    In our deﬁnition of the Contrastivist Hypothesis, no phonological pattern can make ref-

erence to features that are not necessary to distinguish the phonemes of the language.¹³ I

suggest here that a feature is ‘necessary’ for the purposes of this deﬁnition if it is used to dis-

tinguish between at least one pair of segments without redundancy — that is, within a set of

speciﬁcations consistent with being constructed by the Successive Division Algorithm. For

instance, in the ‘standard’ Welsh system the features [lax] and [tense] are not redundant,

since they distinguish between pairs that are otherwise non-distinct (such as [i]/[ɪ]).

    The ‘(non-)redundancy’ of a feature is always relative to the entire set of speciﬁcations for

the given language’s inventory. A contrastive hierarchy captures the insight that redundancy

is always contingent and language-speciﬁc. Much work in this area, usefully summarized by

Dresher (2009), has shown the range of cross-linguistic variation in contrastive speciﬁcation.

As Dresher (2014) argues, the way each language structures the space of available distinc-

tions determines the patterning of phonological symbols; the constitutive role of contrast,

both in phonological and morphosyntactic domains, is also underlined by Cowper & Hall

(2014).

    How, then, can one falsify the Contrastivist Hypothesis within an emergent-feature

framework? Such a falsiﬁcation requires identifying the set of phonological symbols and

phonological patterns, with reference to independent criteria for phonological status. I have

suggested that categoricity is an important necessary condition, but also argued that it is

not suﬃcient, given the possibility of categorical patterns emerging from non-categorical

underlying processes, and suggested modularity as an additional criterion. Building on this

analysis, the featural implementations of the necessary distinctions can be subjected to the

contrastivist test: given a proposed phonological grammar P manipulating (emergent) fea-

tures F, can the set F be derived using a contrastivist approach such as successive division?
    ¹³The deﬁnition of ‘phonological activity’ — whether the grammar ‘makes reference’ to a feature — depends
on the framework. In a rule-based approach, ‘activity’ must mean being present in the structural description or
structural change of some rule. In a constraint-based approach, a feature could be ‘active’ if referred to by an
‘active’ constraint, following the deﬁnition by Kiparsky (2017): ‘a constraint is active at a given level if it is ranked
in such a way that it is visible in at least some derivation, i. e. that the output would be diﬀerent if it were removed
entirely’.


                                                           47
The Contrastivist Hypothesis can then be falsiﬁed if some independently motivated set of

speciﬁcations F cannot be derived in such a non-redundant manner. Such a falsiﬁcation

is, of course, contingent on a fully worked-out analysis of the patterns of the individual lan-

guage.



6    Conclusion

In this paper I have shown how an approach based on the contrastive hierarchy is compat-

ible with emergent feature theory. As both Dresher (2014) and Cowper & Hall (2014) em-

phasize, constrastive speciﬁcation via successive division provides a fundamental mechan-

ism for feature speciﬁcation, but does not necessarily put substantive restrictions on the

nature of the distinctive features involved. An emergent-feature approach goes hand in hand

with a theory of phonologization, where symbolic phonological generalizations emerge over

the course of the life cycle. Once the categories are identiﬁed, the learner must label them.

The labelling can be subject both to bottom-up pressures (e. g. the learnability advantage

aﬀorded by phonetically coherent categories) and to top-down inﬂuence. For the latter cat-

egory, this paper has focused on morphophonological patterns as an important source of

evidence for phonological speciﬁcation, in line with emergent feature theory and contrast-

ivist approaches.

    The study of microvariation in featural speciﬁcations reiterates the advantages of emer-

gent features. The varieties examined here have very similar surface inventories, and yet the

behaviour of the ‘tenseness’ distinction diﬀers in the three varieties. Emergent features al-

low us to not only oﬀer an analysis of the patterns but also capture these cross-linguistic

diﬀerences in a way that universal feature speciﬁcations fail to do, either because they can-

not capture the right classes of segments (as in the case of the restriction on [ə ɪ ʊ] in open

syllables) or because they predict the existence of classes for which there is no phonological

evidence (as in the case of the set of [+tense] segments, which show diﬀering markedness

behaviour in the high and mid subinventories).




                                              48
    Further questions remain. One issue, as a reviewer correctly points out, is at what level

the ‘inventory’ PH relevant for contrastive speciﬁcation should be determined. In the ana-

lysis given here, I have emphasized the phonological visibility of predictable information,

which sits rather uncomfortably with the generativist emphasis on inventories of ‘m-phon-

emes’ — segments that should be posited in underlying representations, stripped of predict-

able information introduced computationally.

    It may well be turn out to be the case that the right level for generalizations about ‘invent-

ories’ is what Kiparsky (2017) calls the ‘l-phonemic’ level: the output of the lexical stratum,

which may contain predictable information.¹⁴ By reframing the issue of ‘contrast’ in terms

of lack of redundancy, I have not considered in detail whether the [tense] and [lax] speciﬁc-

ations should be present at Kiparsky’s ‘m-phonemic’ level, i. e. whether they are contrast-

ive in the traditional generative sense. For the south-western system, there are indications

that at least for the mid vowels this distinction must be encoded there (‘phonemicized’ in

the sense of Hyman 1976) given the existence of unpredictable lax long vowels ([ˈfɛːnɛst]

‘window’). For the high vowels in the south-western system and all non-low vowels in the

standard southern system, however, the distribution still appears fully predictable. Whether

‘tenseness’ should be encoded ‘m-phonemically’ in these cases is a separate question that

cannot be addressed here in detail. Under certain OT assumptions, it is likely that this could

be the case that non-alternating forms lead the learner to postulate a distinction between

underlying (say) /ɛ/ and /e/ (for the standard southern system, cf. [ˈweːdi] wedi ‘after’ but

[ˈvɛɬi] felly ‘so’); (cf. Krämer 2012). By contrast, Dunbar, Dillon & Idsardi (2013) argue that

fully predictable (‘allophonic’) variation is factored out during the learning process so that

such distinctions are not postulated underlyingly. I leave the exploration of this question to

further research.

    Another open question is whether the Contrastivist Hypothesis is applicable to all as-

pects of phonological representation, or only to subsegmental features. In the case of Welsh,

I have not included moraic or other quantity speciﬁcations in the contrastive hierarchy. It is,

however, clear that if the analysis of quantity laid out in section 2.2 moraic speciﬁcations are
  ¹⁴See also, for instance, Mackenzie (2016) for discussion of the relationship between contrastive speciﬁcation
and stratal computation.


                                                      49
contrastive in the ‘m-phonemic’ sense, since moraic and nonmoraic /n l r/ are underlyingly

distinct; thus, the case treated here should not be problematic for contrastivist approaches.

However, the question remains open in more general terms: for instance, Kiparsky (2017)

rejects the Contrastivist Hypothesis as formulated by Hall (2007) precisely because supraseg-

mental phenomena such as stress or syllabiﬁcation can be phonologically relevant without

being contrastive underlyingly.

   To conclude, Dresher (2014) objects to emergent-feature approaches on the grounds that

they put too much of an explanatory burden on extraphonological factors and not enough

on formal phonological structure. I have argued that both types of factors play an important

role in a substance-free analysis. While functional and learnability pressures undoubtedly

have an inﬂuence, in particular through their role in phonological change (including phono-

logization), non-trivial formal hypotheses can be formulated and tested within a substance-

free approach. In particular, an emergent-feature analysis can shed light on an important

challenge to the Contrastivist Hypothesis, and contribute to its reconciliation with the data.

The emphasis on phonology-internal evidence inherent in an emergent-feature approach

allows us to clearly identify independent, computationally framed criteria for phonologiz-

ation (phonological status) that put contrastivist approaches on a ﬁrmer methodological

footing.



References

Adank, Patti, Roel Smits & Roeland van Hout. 2004. A comparison of vowel normalization

   procedures for language variation research. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America

   116(5). 3099–3107.

Awbery, Gwenllian M. 1984. Phonotactic constraints in Welsh. In Martin J. Ball & Glyn E.

   Jones (eds.), Welsh phonology: Selected readings, 65–104. Cardiﬀ: University of Wales

   Press.

Awbery, Gwenllian M. 1986. Pembrokeshire Welsh: A phonological study. Llandysul: Welsh

   Folk Museum.



                                             50
Ball, Martin J. & Briony Williams. 2001. Welsh phonetics (Welsh Studies 17). Lewiston, Queen-

   ston & Lampeter: Edwin Mellen Press.

Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo. 2012. The architecture of grammar and the division of labour in

   exponence. In Jochen Trommer (ed.), The phonology and morphology of exponence: The

   state of the art (Oxford Studies in Theoretical Linguistics 41), 8–83. Oxford: Oxford Uni-

   versity Press.

Bermúdez-Otero, Ricardo. 2015. Amphichronic explanation and the life cycle of phonolo-

   gical processes. In Patrick Honeybone & Joseph C. Salmons (eds.), The Oxford handbook

   of historical phonology, 374–399. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Blaho, Sylvia. 2008. The syntax of phonology: A radically substance-free approach. Tromsø:

   University of Tromsø dissertation.

Bloomﬁeld, Leonard. 1939. Menomini morphophonemics. Travaux du cercle linguistique de

   Prague 8. 105–115.

Boersma, Paul & David Weenink. 2015. Praat: Doing phonetics by computer.

Botma, Bert & Marc van Oostendorp. 2012. A propos of the Dutch vowel system 21 years on,

   22 years on. In Bert Botma & Roland Noske (eds.), Phonological explorations: Empirical,

   theoretical and diachronic issues, 135–154. Berlin: De Gruyter.

Burnham, Kenneth P. & David R. Anderson. 2004. Multimodel inference: Understanding AIC

   and BIC in model selection. Sociological Methods and Research 33(2). 261–304.

Bye, Patrik & Paul de Lacy. 2008. Metrical inﬂuences on fortition and lenition. In Joaquim

   Brandão de Carvalho, Tobias Scheer & Philippe Ségéral (eds.), Lenition and fortition

   (Studies in Generative Grammar 99), 173–206. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Chomsky, Noam & Morris Halle. 1967. The sound pattern of English. New York: Harper & Row.

Clements, G. Nick & Elizabeth V. Hume. 1995. The internal organization of speech sounds. In

   John Goldsmith (ed.), The handbook of phonological theory, 245–306. Oxford: Blackwell.

Cowper, Elizabeth & Daniel Currie Hall. 2014. Reductiō ad discrīmen: Where features come

   from. Nordlyd 41(2). 145–164.

Crosswhite, Catherine M. 2000. Vowel reduction in Russian: A uniﬁed account of standard,

   dialectal, and ‘dissimilative’ patterns. In Catherine M. Crosswhite & Joyce McDonough


                                             51
   (eds.), University of Rochester working papers in the language sciences, vol. Spring 2000,

   107–171.

Dresher, B. Elan. 2009. The contrastive hierarchy in phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-

   versity Press.

Dresher, B. Elan. 2014. The arch not the stones: Universal feature theory without universal

   features. Nordlyd 41(2). 165–181.

Dresher, B. Elan, Glyne Piggott & Keren Rice. 1994. Contrast in phonology: overview. Toronto

   Working Papers in Linguistics 14. iii–xvii.

Dunbar, Ewan, Brian Dillon & William J. Idsardi. 2013. A Bayesian evaluation of the cost of

   abstractness. In Montserrat Sanz, Itziar Laka & Michael K. Tanenhaus (eds.), Language

   down the garden path: The cognitive and biological basis for linguistic structures, 360–

   384. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Durand, Jacques. 2005. Tense/lax, the vowel system of English and phonological theory. In

   Philip Carr, Jacques Durand & Colin J. Ewen (eds.), Headhood, elements, speciﬁcation, and

   contrastivity: Papers in honour of John Anderson (Current Issues in Linguistic Theory 259),

   77–97. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Ellis, Nick C., Cathal O’Docharthaigh, William Hicks, Menna Morgan & Nadine Laporte. 2001.

   Cronfa Electroneg o Gymraeg (CEG): A 1 million word lexical database and frequency

   count for Welsh. http://www.bangor.ac.uk/canolfanbedwyr/ceg.php.en.

Grawunder, Sven, Sabine Asmus & Cormac Anderson. 2015. On the correlation of acoustic

   vowel and coda duration in modern Welsh C(C)VC monosyllables. In The Scottish Con-

   sortium for ICPhS 2015 (ed.), Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of Phonetic

   Sciences. Glasgow: The University of Glasgow.

Hall, Daniel Currie. 2007. The role and representation of contrast in phonological theory.

   Toronto: University of Toronto dissertation.

Hall, Daniel Currie. 2011. Phonological contrast and its phonetic enhancement: Dispersed-

   ness without dispersion. Phonology 28(1). 1–54.

Hannahs, S. J. 2013. The phonology of Welsh. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Harris, John. 1994. English sound structure. Oxford: Blackwell.


                                                 52
Hyman, Larry M. 1976. Phonologization. In Alphonse Juilland (ed.), Linguistic studies presen-

   ted to Joseph H. Greenberg, 407–418. Saratoga: Anna Libri.

Hyman, Larry M. 2013. Enlarging the scope of phonologization. In Alan C. L. Yu (ed.), Origins

   of sound change: Approaches to phonologization, 3–28. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Iosad, Pavel. 2012. Representation and variation in substance-free phonology: A case study in

   Celtic. Tromsø: University of Tromsø dissertation.

Iosad, Pavel. 2016. Welsh vowels data. Dataset. http://datashare.is.ed.ac.uk.

Iosad, Pavel. 2017. The ATR/Laryngeal connection and emergent features. In Bert Botma &

   Marc van Oostendorp (eds.), Primitives of phonological structure. Oxford: Oxford Univer-

   sity Press. Forthcoming.

Jakobson, Roman, Gunnar Fant & Morris Halle. 1951. Preliminaries to speech analysis. Cam-

   bridge, MA: MIT Press.

Jones, Christine & David Thorne. 1992. Dyfed: Blas ar ei thafodieithoedd. Llandysul: Gwasg

   Gomer.

Jones, Glyn E. 1971. Hyd llafariaid yn y Gymraeg. Studia Celtica 6. 175–188.

Jones, Glyn E. 1984. The distinctive vowels and consonants of Welsh. In Martin J. Ball & Glyn

   E. Jones (eds.), Welsh phonology: Selected readings, 40–64. Cardiﬀ: University of Wales

   Press.

Jones, Glyn E. 2000. Iaith lafar Brycheiniog: Astudiaeth o’i ﬀonoleg a’i morﬀoleg. Caerdydd:

   Gwasg Prifysgol Cymru.

Kiparsky, Paul. 2015. Phonologization. In Patrick Honeybone & Joseph C. Salmons (eds.), The

   Oxford handbook of historical phonology, 563–582. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kiparsky, Paul. 2017. Formal and empirical issues in phonological typology. In Larry Hyman

   & Frans Plank (eds.), Phonological typology (Phonetics and Phonology 23). Berlin: De

   Gruyter. Forthcoming.

Kniazev, Sergey & Evgeniy Šaul’skij. 2007. Генезис диссимилятивного аканья (в связи

   с проблемой фонологизации фонетических явлений) [The genesis of dissimilative

   akan’je and the problem of phonologization]. Russkij jazyk v naučnom osveščenii 13(1).

   210–224.


                                             53
Krämer, Martin. 2012. Underlying representations (Key Topics in Phonology 2). Cambridge:

   Cambridge University Press.

Lewis, David Gerwyn. 1960. Astudiaeth eirfaol o iaith lafar gogledd-orllewin Ceredigion.

   Aberystwyth: University of Wales, Aberystwyth MA thesis.

Lindblom, Björn. 1963. Spectrographic study of vowel reduction. The Journal of the Acous-

   tical Society of America 35(11). 1773.

Mackenzie, Sara. 2013. Laryngeal co-occurrence restrictions in Aymara: Contrastive repres-

   entations and constraint interaction. Phonology 30. 297–345.

Mackenzie, Sara. 2016. Consonant harmony in Nilotic: Contrastive speciﬁcations and Stratal

   OT. Glossa 1(1), 12. 1–38.

Mayr, Robert & Hannah Davies. 2011. A cross-dialectal acoustic study of the monophthongs

   and diphthongs of Welsh. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 41(1). 1–25.

Mielke, Jeﬀ. 2008. The emergence of distinctive features. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Morén, Bruce. 2001. Distinctiveness, coercion, and sonority: A uniﬁed theory of weight. Lon-

   don, New York: Routledge.

Morén, Bruce. 2006. Consonant–vowel interactions in Serbian: Features, representations

   and constraint interactions. Lingua 116(8). 1198–1244.

Morris, Jonathan. 2010. Phonetic variation in North Wales: preaspiration. In Proceedings of

   the Second Summer School on Sociolinguistics, University of Edinburgh. http://www.lel.

   ed.ac.uk/sssocio/proceedings/Jon.pdf.

Myers, Scott. 2000. Boundary disputes: The distinction between phonetic and phonological

   sound patterns. In Noel Burton-Roberts, Philip Carr & Gerard Docherty (eds.), Phonolo-

   gical knowledge: Concepts and empirical issues, 245–272. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Odden, David. 2013. Formal Phonology. Nordlyd 40(1). 24–43.

Pearce, Mary. 2007. ATR allophones or undershoort in Kera? UCL Working Papers in Linguist-

   ics 19.

Pilch, Herbert. 1957. Das kymrische Lautsystem. Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprach-

   forschung auf dem Gebiete der Indogermanischen Sprachen 75(1/2). 24–57.




                                             54
Prince, Alan S. & Paul Smolensky. 1993. Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in Gener-

   ative Grammar. Tech. rep. Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science & University

   of Colorado, Boulder.

R Core Team. 2016. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Version 3.2.4.

   R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org/.

Scheer, Tobias. 2010. A guide to morphosyntax–phonology interface theories: How extra-

   phonological information is treated in phonology since Trubetzkoy’s Grenzsignale. Berlin:

   Mouton de Gruyter.

Scobbie, James M. 2007. Interface and overlap in phonetics and phonology. In Charles Reiss

   & Gillian Ramchand (eds.), The Oxford handbook of linguistic interfaces, 17–52. Oxford:

   Oxford University Press.

Sommerfelt, Alf. 1925. Studies in Cyfeiliog Welsh: A contribution to Welsh dialectology.

   Avhandlinger utgitt av Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo. II. Hist.-Filos. Klasse. 192,

   No. 3. Oslo: I kommission hos Jacob Dybwad.

Strycharczuk, Patrycja. 2012. Phonetics-phonology interaction in pre-sonorant voicing.

   Manchester: University of Manchester dissertation.

Thomas, Alan R. 1960. Ffonemau llafarog tafodiaith Dyﬀryn Wysg. Bulletin of the Board of

   Celtic Studies 18. 265–270.

Thomas, Alan R. 1961. Ffonemau cytseiniol tafodiaith Dyﬀryn Wysg. Bulletin of the Board of

   Celtic Studies 19. 193–201.

Thomas, Alan R. 1966. Systems in Welsh phonology. Studia Celtica 1. 93–127.

Thomas, Ceinwen H. 1993. Tafodiaith Nantgarw: Astudiaeth o Gymraeg llafar Nantgarw yng

   Nghwm Taf, Morgannwg. Caerdydd: Gwasg Prifysgol Cymru.

Torres-Tamarit, Francesc. 2015. Length and voicing in Friulian and Milanese: Or why rule-

   free derivations are needed. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 33(4). 1351–1386.

Watkins, Arwyn T. 1967. Some phonological features of the Welsh dialect of Llansamlet (West

   Glamorgan). In Wolfgang Meid (ed.), Beiträge zur Indogermanistik und Keltologie: Julius

   Pokorny zum 80. Geburtstag gewidmet, 315–322. Innsbruck: Sprachwissenschaftliches In-

   stitut der Universität Innsbruck.


                                            55
Wells, John C. 1979. Final voicing and vowel length in Welsh. Phonetica 36(4–5). 344–360.

Wmﬀre, Iwan. 2003. Language and place-names in Wales: The evidence of toponymy in Car-

   diganshire. Cardiﬀ: University of Wales Press.

Wmﬀre, Iwan. 2007. Review of Ball & Williams (2001). Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie 55.

   301–307.

Wood, Simon N. 2006. Generalized additive models: An introduction with R. Chapman &

   Hall/CRC.




                                             56
Appendix


           Word        Expected pronunciation   Gloss
           blynyddau   [bləˈnəðˑɛ]              ‘years’
           boddi       [ˈbɔːði]                 ‘to perish’
           bore        [ˈboːrɛ]                 ‘morning’
           brodor      [ˈbroːdɔr]               ‘native (noun)’
           brodorol    [brɔˈdoːrɔl]             ‘native (adjective)’
           bwced       [ˈbʊkʰˑɛd]               ‘bucket’
           bwgan       [ˈbuːɡan]                ‘ghost’
           byddin      [ˈbəðˑɪn]                ‘army’
           caletaf     [kʰaˈlɛtʰˑa]             ‘hardest’
           cegin       [ˈkʰɛːɡɪn]               ‘kitchen’
           cerrig      [ˈkʰɛrˑɪɡ]               ‘stones’
           cigydd      [ˈkʰiˑɡɪð]               ‘butcher’
           cludo       [ˈkʰliːdɔ]               ‘to transport’
           codi        [ˈkʰɔːdi]                ‘to rise’
           colli       [ˈkʰɔɬˑi]                ‘to lose’
           copi        [ˈkʰɔpʰˑi]               ‘copy’
           crwtyn      [ˈkʰrʊtʰɪn]              ‘boy’
           curo        [ˈkʰiːrɔ]                ‘to bear’
           cwbwl       [ˈkʰuːbʊl]               ‘entire’
           cwlwm       [ˈkʰuːlʊm]               ‘knot’
           cwpan       [ˈkʰʊpʰˑan]              ‘cup’
           cwpwrdd     [ˈkʰʊpʰˑʊrθ]             ‘cupboard’
           cwta        [ˈkʰʊtʰˑa]               ‘curt’
           cyfan       [ˈkʰəvˑan]               ‘entire, all’
           cyﬂe        [ˈkʰəvˑlɛ]               ‘chance’
           cyllell     [ˈkʰəɬˑɛɬ]               ‘knife’
           cynnal      [ˈkʰənˑal]               ‘to support’
           cyson       [ˈkʰəsˑɔn]               ‘regular’
           defod       [ˈdeːvɔd]                ‘ceremony’
           diben       [ˈdiːbɛn]                ‘purpose’
           dibyn       [ˈdiːbɪn]                ‘precipice’
           difyr       [ˈdiːvɪr]                ‘pleasant’
           digon       [ˈdiːɡɔn]                ‘enough’
           dillad      [ˈdɪɬˑad]                ‘clothes’
           dilyn       [ˈdiːlɪn]                ‘to follow’
           diweddar    [dɪˈweːðar]              ‘latest’
           dwsin       [ˈdʊsˑɪn]                ‘dozen’
           Ebrill      [ˈɛbˑrɪɬ]                ‘April’
           edrych      [ˈɛdˑrɪχ]                ‘to look’
           enillwch    [ɛˈnɪɬˑʊχ]               ‘win! (pl.)’
           ennill      [ˈɛnˑɪɬ]                 ‘to win’


                                      57
Word       Expected pronunciation   Gloss
enwocaf    [ɛnˈwɔkʰˑa]              ‘most famous’
felly      [ˈvɛɬˑi]                 ‘so’
ﬀenestr    [ˈfeːnɛst]               ‘window’
ﬀrwgwd     [ˈfruːɡʊd]               ‘brawl’
ﬀyddlon    [ˈfəðˑlɔn]               ‘loyal’
gelyn      [ˈɡɛːlɪn]                ‘enemy’
geni       [ˈɡɛːni]                 ‘to give birth’
goddef     [ˈɡoːðɛ]                 ‘to suﬀer’
gofal      [ˈɡoːval]                ‘care’
gofyn      [ˈɡɔːvɪn]                ‘to ask’
gogledd    [ˈɡɔɡˑlɛð]               ‘north’
gosod      [ˈɡɔsˑɔd]                ‘to attack’
Guto       [ˈɡɪtʰɔ]                 personal name
gwddw      [ˈɡuːðʊɡ]                ‘neck’
gwella     [ˈɡwɛɬˑa]                ‘to improve’
gyrru      [ˈɡərˑi]                 ‘to drive’
heddiw     [ˈhɛːði]                 ‘today’
heddlu     [ˈhɛðˑli]                ‘police’
hollol     [ˈhɔɬˑɔl]                ‘entire’
honni      [ˈhɔnˑi]                 ‘to claim’
hwnnw      [ˈhʊnˑu]                 ‘that’
hybu       [ˈhəbˑi]                 ‘to promote’
Hydref     [ˈhədˑrɛ]                ‘October’
ifanc      [ˈiːvaŋk]                ‘young’
isod       [ˈɪsˑɔd]                 ‘below’
llety      [ˈɬɛtʰi]                 ‘hotel’
llinell    [ˈɬɪnˑɛɬ]                ‘line’
llipa      [ˈɬɪpʰˑa]                ‘limp’
llogi      [ˈɬɔːɡi]                 ‘to hire’
llonydd    [ˈɬɔːnɪð]                ‘contented’
lludw      [ˈɬiːdu]                 ‘ashes’
llygad     [ˈɬəɡˑad]                ‘eye’
lwcus      [ˈlʊkʰˑɪs]               ‘happy’
meddwl     [ˈmɛːðʊl]                ‘to think’
minnau     [ˈmɪnˑɛ]                 ‘I (emphatic)’
modryb     [ˈmɔdˑrɪb]               ‘aunt’
mwdwl      [ˈmuːdʊl]                ‘haycock’
Nadolig    [(na)ˈdɔːlɪɡ]            ‘Christmas’
neges      [ˈneːɡɛs]                ‘message’
nesaf      [ˈnɛsˑa]                 ‘next’
ogof       [ˈoːɡɔv]                 ‘cave’
pecyn      [ˈpʰɛkʰˑɪn]              ‘package’
pennod     [ˈpʰɛnˑɔd]               ‘chapter’
personol   [pʰɛrˈsoːnɔl]            ‘personal’
plygu      [ˈpʰləɡˑi]               ‘to fold’


                           58
Word       Expected pronunciation       Gloss
pobi       [ˈpʰɔːbi]                    ‘to bake’
pobol      [ˈpʰoːbɔl]                   ‘people’
popeth     [ˈpʰɔpʰˑɛθ]                  ‘everything’
posib      [ˈpʰɔsˑɪb]                   ‘possible’
problem    [ˈpʰrɔbˑlɛm]                 ‘problem’
pryder     [ˈpʰrədˑɛr]                  ‘worry’
prynu      [ˈpʰrənˑi]                   ‘to buy’
           [ˈpʰʊrˑni]
prysur     [ˈpʰrəsˑir]                  ‘busy’
pwysicaf   [pʰʊiˈsɪkʰˑa]                ‘most important’
pysgota    [pʰəsˈkɔtʰˑa]                ‘to ﬁsh’
rhedeg     [ˈrʰeːdɛɡ]                   ‘to run’
rheswm     [ˈrʰɛsˑʊm]                   ‘reason’
sefyll     [ˈsɛːvɪɬ]                    ‘to stay’
seren      [ˈseːrɛn]                    ‘star’
siglo      [ˈsiɡˑlɔ]                    ‘to shake’
           [ˈʃɪɡˑlɔ]
suddo      [ˈsiːðɔ]                     ‘to sink’
sydyn      [ˈsədˑɪn]                    ‘sudden’
tebycaf    [tʰɛˈbəkʰˑa]                 ‘most similar’
tebyg      [ˈtʰɛːbɪɡ]                   ‘similar’
tecaf      [ˈtʰɛkʰˑa]                   ‘fairest’
tipyn      [ˈtʰɪpʰˑɪn]                  ‘little bit’
tlotyn     [ˈtʰlɔtʰˑɪn]                 ‘poor person’
tocyn      [ˈtʰɔkʰˑɪn]                  ‘ticket’
tonnau     [ˈtʰɔnˑɛ]                    ‘waves’
torri      [ˈtʰɔrˑi]                    ‘to break’
trefnu     [ˈtʰrɛvˑni]                  ‘to arrange’
tybed      [ˈtʰəbˑɛd]                   ‘I wonder’
tyfu       [ˈtʰəvˑi]                    ‘to grow’
unig       [ˈiːnɪɡ]                     ‘only’
wedyn      [ˈwɛːdɪn]                    ‘afterwards’
wynebau    [ʊjˈneːbɛ]                   ‘faces’
           [ɡwɪˈneːbɛ]
ysbyty     [əsˈpətʰˑi]                  ‘hospital’

                  Table 6: Test items




                           59
                                      //a//                       //e//                      //i//
                          3



                          2



                          1



                          0
Estimated normalized F1




                          -1




                                      //o//                       //u//
                          3



                          2



                          1



                          0



                          -1



                               Open           Closed      Open            Closed
                                                          Final syllable type

                               Figure 13: Estimated normalized F1, by ﬁnal syllable type and vowel




                                                                 60
Code   Gender   Age bracket    Place of origin
Sp1    Female   56–60          Carmarthen, Carmarthenshire
Sp2    Male     60–65          Meidrim, Carmarthenshire
Sp3    Male     18–25          Carmarthen, Carmarthenshire
Sp4    Female   50–55          Cardiﬀ, Glamorgan
Sp5    Female   75–80          Goodwick, Pembrokeshire
Sp6    Female   70–75          Crymych, Pembrokeshire
Sp7    Female   25–30          Carmarthen, Carmarthenshire
Sp8    Female   40–45          Aberystwyth, Cardiganshire

         Table 5: Participants in the acoustic study




                              61
                                          No duration eﬀect   No length eﬀect     Both duration and length   No random eﬀect
     Intercept                                   8.55∗              8.45∗                    8.51∗                 8.54∗
                                              [8.41; 8.70]       [8.30; 8.59]             [8.37; 8.65]          [8.43; 8.66]
     //ə//                                       0.54∗              0.43∗                    0.51∗                 0.51∗
                                              [0.33; 0.75]       [0.21; 0.64]             [0.31; 0.71]          [0.34; 0.67]
     //e//                                       0.76∗              0.70∗                     0.77∗                0.77∗
                                              [0.64; 0.88]       [0.61; 0.79]             [0.65; 0.89]          [0.68; 0.86]
     //o//                                       0.88∗              0.79∗                     0.89∗                0.81∗
                                              [0.61; 1.14]       [0.51; 1.07]             [0.63; 1.14]          [0.60; 1.03]
     //u//                                        0.12               0.20                     0.10                  0.02
                                             [−0.16; 0.40]      [−0.09; 0.48]            [−0.17; 0.36]         [−0.20; 0.24]
     Long vowel                                  −0.29∗                                      −0.19∗                −0.21∗
                                            [−0.46; −0.12]                              [−0.36; −0.02]        [−0.35; −0.07]
     Long //e//                                  −0.14                                       −0.12                 −0.13∗
                                             [−0.30; 0.02]                               [−0.27; 0.04]        [−0.25; −0.01]
     Long //o//                                  −0.25∗                                      −0.23∗                −0.19∗
                                            [−0.47; −0.03]                              [−0.44; −0.01]        [−0.37; −0.02]




62
     Long //u//                                   0.23                                        0.24∗                 0.30∗
                                             [−0.02; 0.47]                                [0.01; 0.47]          [0.11; 0.49]
     F2 smooth                                    8.77               8.68                     8.76                  8.71
                                            [−8.72; 26.25]      [−8.72; 26.09]          [−8.72; 26.24]        [−8.88; 26.31]
     Random intercept for word                   63.45              76.51                    58.88
                                          [−146.27; 273.16]   [−141.05; 294.06]       [−150.84; 268.59]
     Duration smooth                                                 3.24                     3.14                 3.17
                                                                [−3.84; 10.33]          [−3.79; 10.07]        [−4.00; 10.34]
     AICc                                      -327.97             -310.40                 -337.98               -322.74
     AIC                                       -380.23             -382.63                 -388.17               -325.85
     BIC                                        -64.24              -19.67                  -77.70               -241.76
     Log Likelihood                            272.33              285.75                  274.86                184.80
     R2                                          0.95                0.95                    0.95                  0.93
     Num. obs.                                   345                 345                     345                   345
     ∗ 0 outside the conﬁdence interval



                                               Table 7: Models for log2 (F1) for speaker Sp1
                                     No height eﬀect         No interaction     Model with interaction
Intercept                                   −1.01∗                 −1.06∗                 −1.00∗
                                       [−1.24; −0.77]         [−1.29; −0.83]         [−1.18; −0.83]
//ə//                                       0.70∗                  0.65∗                  0.79∗
                                         [0.44; 0.97]           [0.38; 0.91]           [0.58; 1.00]
//e//                                        1.54∗                  1.43∗                  1.58∗
                                         [1.28; 1.81]           [1.16; 1.70]           [1.35; 1.82]
//o//                                        1.59∗                  1.51∗                  1.54∗
                                         [1.27; 1.91]           [1.19; 1.83]           [1.26; 1.81]
//u//                                        0.26                   0.14                   0.29
                                        [−0.09; 0.60]          [−0.20; 0.49]          [−0.04; 0.62]
Long vowel                                  −0.22                  −0.28∗                 −0.25∗
                                        [−0.49; 0.05]         [−0.56; −0.01]         [−0.47; −0.04]
Long /e/                                    −0.26                  −0.17                  −0.83∗
                                        [−0.62; 0.10]          [−0.52; 0.19]         [−1.15; −0.52]
Long /o/                                     0.00                   0.06                  −0.38∗
                                        [−0.35; 0.36]          [−0.29; 0.42]         [−0.68; −0.08]
Long /u/                                     0.34                   0.34                   0.35
                                        [−0.09; 0.76]          [−0.09; 0.76]          [−0.16; 0.85]
Duration smooth                              1.86                   1.53                   2.23
                                        [−2.70; 6.42]          [−2.17; 5.24]          [−3.16; 7.61]
F2 smooth                                    3.34                   3.48                   3.79
                                       [−4.05; 10.73]         [−4.06; 11.01]         [−3.97; 11.56]
Speaker (random)                             4.41                   4.43                   4.35
                                       [−5.39; 14.21]         [−5.37; 14.23]         [−5.45; 14.15]
Word (random)                               98.08                  96.93                  76.56
                                     [−117.51; 313.68]      [−118.67; 312.52]      [−123.35; 276.48]
High post-tonic vowel                                               0.27∗                  0.05
                                                                [0.15; 0.38]          [−0.27; 0.36]
//e// before high                                                                         −0.08
                                                                                      [−0.46; 0.29]
//o// before high                                                                          0.02
                                                                                      [−0.35; 0.38]
//u// before high                                                                         −0.18
                                                                                      [−0.60; 0.24]
Long vowel before high                                                                     0.03
                                                                                      [−0.35; 0.41]
Long //e// before high                                                                     1.06∗
                                                                                       [0.58; 1.54]
Long //o// before high                                                                     0.82∗
                                                                                       [0.35; 1.30]
Long //u// before high                                                                     0.05
                                                                                      [−0.59; 0.69]
AICc                                     2113.37                2105.94                2085.73
AIC                                      2098.96                2091.61                2074.11
BIC                                      2761.47                2752.27                2670.42
Log Likelihood                           -931.78                -928.44                -931.12
R2                                         0.79        63         0.79                   0.79
Num. obs.                                 2057                   2057                   2057
∗ 0 outside the conﬁdence interval



                  Table 8: Models for normalized F1, south-western speakers
                            No duration eﬀect        Duration eﬀect     Model with interaction
Intercept                          345.73∗               381.57∗                 345.09∗
                              [286.15; 405.32]      [327.99; 435.16]        [271.91; 418.28]
//ə//                              99.06∗                88.54∗                  155.20∗
                               [33.17; 164.95]       [30.06; 147.02]         [67.97; 242.42]
//e//                              294.38∗               250.44∗                 277.96∗
                              [234.12; 354.65]      [199.97; 300.90]        [203.94; 351.98]
//o//                              197.05∗               114.78∗                 191.61∗
                               [93.96; 300.13]       [19.17; 210.40]         [79.28; 303.94]
//u//                               47.06                 31.88                   59.40
                              [−50.98; 145.11]      [−57.61; 121.37]        [−48.50; 167.30]
Long vowel                          13.43                −12.86                   8.24
                               [−44.22; 71.08]       [−40.49; 14.77]         [−51.54; 68.01]
Long /e/                            −2.26                                        −19.40
                               [−77.03; 72.51]                               [−96.29; 57.50]
Long /o/                           −63.91                                        −74.77
                              [−143.35; 15.53]                               [−157.25; 7.72]
Long /u/                             4.19                                         37.05
                               [−81.50; 89.88]                              [−51.42; 125.53]
F2 smooth                            2.77                 2.76                    2.81
                                [−3.63; 9.17]         [−3.60; 9.11]           [−3.66; 9.28]
Word (random)                       17.86                 21.02                   16.89
                             [−193.82; 229.54]      [−196.53; 238.58]      [−194.79; 228.56]
Duration smooth                                           2.05
                                                      [−2.86; 6.96]
Duration for //i//                                                               1.49
                                                                             [−2.02; 4.99]
Duration for //e//                                                               1.00
                                                                             [−0.96; 2.96]
Duration for //o//                                                               1.40
                                                                             [−1.87; 4.68]
Duration for //u//                                                               2.86
                                                                             [−3.59; 9.31]
AICc                                 4107.10             4090.27               4093.57
AIC                                  4100.75             4082.94               4083.92
BIC                                  4217.76             4208.36               4226.97
Log Likelihood                       -2019.75           -2008.64               -2004.52
R2                                     0.67               0.69                   0.69
Num. obs.                              337                 337                   337
∗ 0 outside the conﬁdence interval



                                       Table 9: Models for F1, Sp8




                                                   64
