-Stress 
in 
modern Welsh 
Dissertation presented for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy of the 
University of Cambridge, September 1983. 
UNtVERSITY 
LIBRARY 
CAMBRIDGE 
Briony Jane WILLIAMS 
Briony ~ Williams 
Sel wyn College, and 
Department of Linguistics, 
University of Cambridge. 
Se ptember 1983 
Declaration 
This dissertation is the result of my own work and includes nothing 
which is the outcome of wor k done in collaboration. 
This dissertation does not exceed 80,000 words in length. 
Acknowledgements 
I should like first and foremost to thank my supervisor, Dr. Francis 
Nolan, for his inv al uable adv ice and for assistance in 
practicalities even when inconvenient. Thanks are also due to Nigel 
Vincent for the first germs of an idea, to Richard Baron for 
clarification of a statistical point, and to Mike the technician for 
instruction in the operation of some equipment. An y errors or 
omissions in the thesis are, of course, entirely my own 
responsib il ity. 
Stress in modern Welsh: abstract of Ph.D. dissertation 
Br ion y J. Will iams Selwyn College and Department 
September 1983 of Linguistics, University of Cambridge. 
The first chapter reviews twentieth- century work on stress, considering 
stress from several points of view: as intensity, pitch and rhythm. The 
weaknesses of some approaches are pointed out. Some past work on isochrony 
is summarised and the metrical theory of stress introduced. The problem 
presented by stress in Welsh is introduced informally. 
The second chapter describes a series of measurements and experiments 
carried out to investigate stress in Welsh. Acoustic measurements are made 
of Fo, intensity, duration, and lengths of rhythmic feet. It is concluded 
that stress in Welsh is determined by rhythm rather than inherent acoustic 
cues. Statistical anal ysis of further measurements of feet reveal s the 
effects of syllabification and also supports the previous findings. 
Perceptual experiments using native speaker judgements of resynthesised 
speech are presented and analysed; it is concluded that Welsh stress is 
linked with rhythm and with consonantal length (the consonant after a 
stressed vowel being longer than one after an unstressed vowel), while it 
has no direct link with pitch- prominence as such. 
The third chapter outl ines a theoretical framework based on the 
'metrical' theory of stress, and proceeds to apply it to Welsh . This 
modified framework makes use of Selkirk's 'prosodic units', but differs 
from the usual forms of the theory by also taking account of the semantic 
weight of words in the utterance context. It is agreed that this makes for 
a more explanatory theory, and some puzzles of English intonation are 
shown to be described more simply using such a theory. The patterns of 
intonation in Welsh are also described in this framework. 
The fourth chapter discusses the implications posed by the 
experimental results for the general theory of stress . Reference is made 
to some research in the psychology of stress perception, and evidence is 
also presented from the historical development of Welsh from ancient 
British times, and also from the Welsh bardic rules of versification. It is 
argued that Welsh has a unique contribution to make to our understanding 
of the nature of and possible forms taken by stress, and the conclusion is 
that stress in any language, and more particularly in English, may not be 
as straightforward a matter as has been hitherto assumed. 
CONTENTS 
1. In troduction 
1.1. Approaches to the definition of stress 
1. 1. 1. Measurable acoustic cues 
1.1.2. Perceived loudness 
1.1.3. Lexical stress versus sentence stress 
1. 1.4. Philological/phonological view 
1.2. Past work on stress 
1.2. 1. Stress as primarily psychological reality 
1.2.2. Stress as intensity 
1.2.3. Stress as pitch 
1.2.4. Stress as accent 
1.2.5. Stress as a component of rhythm 
1.2.6. Stress as rhythm: the "metrical" theory of stress 
1.3. Informal observations of Welsh stress 
1.3.1. Welsh stress rule 
1.3.2. Reaction of Engl ish listener s 
1.3.3. Robustness of the ultima 
1.3.4. Weakness of the penult 
1.4. Plan of the thesis 
2. Experimental work 
2.1. Words in citation form 
2.1.1. Aim 
2.1.2. Method 
2. 1.3. Results 
2.1.4. Discussion 
2.2. Connected speech 
2.2.1. Unrehearsed speech: segmental measurements 
2.2.2. Unrehearsed speech: foot measurements 
2.2.3. Rehearsed speech 
2.2.4. Segmental measurements 
2.3. Perceptual experiments 
2.3.1. Post - stress consonant 
2.3.2. Phonological segmental length 
2.3.3. Effect of pitch-prominence 
2.3.4. Comparison of perceptual experiments 
i 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
6 
8 
13 
16 
20 
23 
23 
23 
24 
25 
26 
28 
28 
28 
28 
30 
31 
32 
32 
36 
39 
44 
47 
47 
55 
58 
67 
> 
2.4. Experimental findings 
2.4.1. Summary of ex perimental results 
2.4.2. Implications of the results 
3. Theoretical considerations 
3.1. Syllable level 
3.2. Word level 
3.2.1. Syllable, or 'a' 
3.2.2. Stress foot, or '2:' 
3.2.3. Prosodic word, or '6V' 
3.3. Semantic level 
3.3.1. Thompson's features 
3.3.2. Matrix versus grid 
3.3.3. A semantic grid 
3.3.4. Semantic grid versus n-ary features alone 
3.3.5. A possible sol ution 
3.3.6. Semantic and metr ical grid s 
3.3.7. Some advantages of this type of analysis 
3.~& [content] and the prosodic representation 
3.3.9. The need to take account of semantics 
3.4. Metrical structure (phrasal level) 
3.4.1. Selkirk's units 
3.4.2. Discussion 
3.4.3. Intonation 
3.4.4. Building up the tree 
3.4.5. Selkirk's Monosyllable Rule 
3.4.6. Ex amples 
3.5. The metrical grid 
3.5.1. Introduction 
3.5.2. Description 
3.5.3. Use of the metrical grid 
3.5.4. The need for the metrical grid 
3.5.5. Stress shifting 
3.6. Some intonational considerations 
3.6.1. Congruence 
3.6.2. 'Neutral' pattern 
3.6.3. Compound nucleus 
ii 
80 
80 
84 
88 
88 
92 
92 
94 
98 
104 
104 
106 
107 
109 
116 
1 '19 
121 
124 
125 
127 
127 
130 
135 
141 
142 
148 
151 
151 
152 
154 
159 
163 
172 
172 
173 
174 
3.6.4. Complex nucleus ( i) 
3. 6.5. Complex nucleus (ii ) 
3. 6.6. Stressed nonlexical word 
3.7. u:>cation of [3 content] 
3.7. 1. Neutral pattern 
3.7.2. Contrastive stress 
3. 7.3. Emphatic stress 
3.7.4. Discussion 
3.8. Application of the system to Welsh 
3.8.1. Vowel level 
3.8.2. Word level 
3.8.3. Semantic level 
3.8.4. Phrasal level 
3. 8.5. Metr ical grid 
3.8.6. Intonational considerations 
4. Discussion 
4.1. Penultimate stress in Wel sh 
4.1 . 1. Phonetic mechanisms 
4.3.2. Penultimate stress; non - linguistic ev idence 
4.3.3. Final stress; non- linguistic evidence 
4.4. Implications for the theory of stress 
4.4. 1. Two trend s 
4.4.2. Stress accent and pitch accent 
4.4.3. The notion of stress 
4.4.4. Uncertainty in the description of stress 
iii 
178 
180 
182 
183 
183 
183 
184 
186 
190 
190 
190 
202 
203 
209 
210 
221 
221 
221 
237 
238 
241 
241 
243 
244 
246 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Approaches to the definition of stress 
The word 'stress' has been used in so many different senses in phonetic 
and phonological literature that it is a far from simple task to unravel 
the knot of meanings and pick out the particular strand that is being used 
at anyone time. The strands are of widely varying types, som e blending 
into neighbouring shades more readily than others, and the only point on 
which there is unanimity is that stress exists . Individual views of 
stress have been researched in depth and advocated with conv iction, 
leading to a true entanglement of the various strands; it may be that our 
understanding of stress will only be complete when we can unpick and make 
use of each one of these views in an interwoven whole. 
Di fferent types of approach to stress are described briefly below, and 
there follows a disc ussion of past work on the subj ect . Nearl y all work 
in this area has been done using English, and this should be constantly 
borne in mind; the conclusions drawn need not be relevant to other 
languages. 
1.1.1 l4Ieasurable acoustic cues 
Much useful work on the nature of stress has concentrated on its 
physical realisation in ways that can be quantified by machines such as 
the sound- spectrograph and, nowadays, the computer with wave- form display. 
The relevant acoustic parameters are: fundamental frequency (henceforth 
Fo), intensity and duration. These approximately correspond to perceived 
pitch, loudness and length - approximately, since there are interaction 
effects between the cues such that what the brain registers may not 
necessar i1 y be what the machine record s. 
UNfVEASITY 
L1Bf! lAY 
CAMBAI[)(3€ 
F" 
These measurements are carried out on a syllable-by-syllable basis, the 
researcher concentrating on the inherent properties of a partic ular 
spoken syllable or vowel that cause it to be heard as stressed or 
unstressed, as the case may be. The overall structure of the utterance is 
not considered, and stress is seen as a binary feature, while the search is 
for an acoustic cue or cues that can give as nearl y as possible 100% 
accuracy in identifying stressed syllables. This 'absolutist' approach 
was popular when the sound-spectrograph first became widely used, and much 
work was done on inherent acoustic cues to stress; however, it is less 
influential nowadays, since the focus has shifted to the formulation of 
more satisfactory theories to account for the acoustic facts discovered. 
1.1.2 Perceived loudness 
On the whole, loudness is the perceptual correlate of the acoustic cue 
of intensity (see section 1.2.2.2. for details of work in this area). The 
advantage of the view of stress as perceived loudness is that this leaves 
untouched the cue of Fo/pi tch var iation, so that the latter can be 
reserved to figure in the description of intonation patterns. Both the 
'British' and the 'American' schools of thought on suprasegmentals separate 
stress from intonation, and the identifying of stress with perceived 
loudness is a popular means of doing this (see Ladd 1980, Chapter 1, for 2 
clear summary of these two schools of thought). While loudness is the 
auditory correlate of the acoustic cue of intensity, the latter is in its 
turn the acoustic correlate of the articulatory/physiological cue of 
greater muscular effort - in this case, in the lungs. This greater effort 
leads to heightened subglottal pressure, which may cause a rise in the 
frequency of vibration of the vocal folds quite apart from any muscular 
adjustments in the larynx itself. The so-called 'larynx versus lungs' 
controversy (see section 1.2.3.1.) centred on the question of whether 
laryngeal adjustments or increased subglottal pressure was the cause of 
the Fo rise observed on stressed syllables in English. 
2 
1.1.3 ll..ex ical stress versus sentence stress 
Every polysyllabic word in English has a fixed place for stress 
(ignoring stress shifting for the present - see section 3.5.5.). This one 
stressable syllable is stressed when the word is spoken in citation form; 
this is known as 'lexical stress'. Similarly, every phrase or short 
sentence has one syllable of especial prominence, usually near the end of 
the string; this is known as 'sentence stress'. In addition, before the 
most prom inent syllable in a sentence, some syllables with a lesser degree 
of stress may be heard; however, not all the lexically-stressed syllables 
in the sentence need actually be made prominent in this way in a 
particular utterance. 
The different grades of stress may lead to confusion as to which type 
of stress is being discussed on any given occasion, and may tend to class 
together dissimilar phenomena. The term 'sentence stress' is best 
abandoned in favour of the British-school term 'nucleus', which allows the 
influence of intonation as well as of stress. Section 1.2.4. presents 
Bolinger's rather different solution to the problem of distinguishing 
between lexical and sentence stress. 
1.1.4 Philological/phonological view 
In the historical development of any language, some sound changes occur 
in stressed syllables and others in untressed syllables. The former sound 
changes are usually of the 'strengthening' type, and involve e.g. for 
peripheral vowel vowels: diphthongisation, movement towards a more 
quality, and lengthening; and for consonants: gemination, mutation, and 
insertion of a new consonant. The changes occurring in unstressed 
syllables include e.g. for vowels: monophthongisation, movement towards 
schwa in qual ity, shortening or deletion; and for consonants: 
simplification of clusters, leni tion, and deletion of intervocal ic 
consonants. The overall effect is that stressed syllables are more 
auditorily distinct and easier to perceive. 
In the synchronic description of any language, some phonological 
processes occur in stressed syllables and others in untressed syllables. 
The processes are of the same type as those described above. Thus it is 
3 
possible to define stress, for both diachronic and synchronic purposes, 
purely on distributional grounds, without appealing to phonetics to 
provide a physical basis to the distinction stressed/unstressed. 
The philological/phonological view described above will not be further 
developed in this study. It may be suitable for the abstract phonological 
analysis of a language, but in the end it is not an explanation, merely a 
restating of the problem; it offers no reasons why particular qualities 
of segments should be better exponents of stress than others, nor why 
particular syllables should be picked out to receive stress . Neither does 
it explain the effect of the string of stressed and unstressed syllables 
on the listener, who is able to extract from the signal the perceptual cues 
to stressed syllables. Though the listener may al so draw on his or her 
own knowledge of the language, this point will not be further considered. 
The mere fact that there exist certain cues to stress in the speech signal 
makes it unlikel y that knowledge of the language is all that is required 
to apportion stress correctly; therefore this study contains a lengthy 
consid er ation of the physical aspect of stress. The 
philological/phonological view treats stress as 'given'; in this study, 
stress is treated as the unknown quantity and the problem is approached 
from first principles. 
1.2 Past wor k on str ess 
1.2.1 Stress as primarily psychological reality 
Of the 'physical' definitions of stress, the one that verges most nearly 
on the 'abstract' is the view of stress as ex isting in the brain as a 
psychological reality. The earliest modern proponent of this view is 
Andre Classe, who states: 
'Stress may be defined as an impulse (primarily of a 
psychological nature) which expresses itself in the first place by 
an increase of pressure in the speech- canal and approximately 
coincides with the point of greatest pressure.' (Classe 1939:37) 
4 
While Classe does not deny the relevance of physiological cues to 
stress, he asserts the primacy of the physiological dimension in the 
definition of stress. A similar view is taken by Gimson, who writes: 
' ••• stress certainl y ex ists in English in terms of a mental pulse 
or beat, measurable perhaps in the nervous activity of the brain! 
(Gimson 1956: 149) 
Gimson likewise states that this 'mental beat' may be realised by extra 
articulatory effort or greater loudness; however, he sees the 
psychological dimension as primary. More recently, Chomsky and Halle have 
attempted to place stress within the native speaker's linguistic 
'competence', writing: 
' ... representations of stress contours and similar pred ictable 
phenomena correspond, up to a point, to some perceptual reality that 
can be brought to consciousness with training and care.' (Chomsky 
and Halle 1968:26) 
Since 'competence' for Chomsky is a psychological reality, it follows 
that he also regards stress as primarily psychological. Unlike Classe and 
Gimson, however, Chomsky and Halle have not the slightest interest in the 
physical manifestation of stress, preferring to concentrate on its 
functioning in the abstract linguistic system as a whole. In fact, they 
have serious doubts as to whether phonetic representations of stress 
describe any kind of physical or acoustic real ity at all. Their favoured 
view is that the native speaker (and native speaker phonetician) depends 
purely on his or her knowledge of the language when picking out stressed 
syllables. This is an extreme view. Most workers on stress would allow 
the physical facts at least some space in the description, while a few 
would reject entirely the notion that listeners could impose their own 
structuring on the speech signal, and would attempt to devise stress-
locating algorithms that a computer might use. For English and many other 
languages, some degree of correlation of stress with acoustic and 
physiological phenomena has been discovered. Accordingly, the research 
using this line of approach will be outlined below, and the 'abstract' 
approach will not be further considered. 
5. 
1.2.2 Stress as intensity 
1.2.2.1. Production aspect 
One very old tradition treats stress as an increase in intensity on a 
particular syllable, caused by extra effort in the lung musculature and 
leading to greater perceived loudness. This approach first finds a clear 
formulation in the work of Stetson (1928) whose research, though somewhat 
unreliable, sparked off much useful work in the area. He states that each 
syllable is associated with a 'chest pulse', or contraction of the 
expiratory muscles, while stressed syllables receive an especially 'heavy 
stroke', which leads to a raising of the Fo of vibration of the vocal folds. 
He writes: 
' ••• the heavy stroke of the accent involves the chest pressure and 
is apt to change the pitch because the laryngeal musculature is 
often affected by tensions in the other musculatures of speech.' 
(Stetson 1928: 141 ) 
This particular assertion is based on no supporting ev idence and has 
subsequentl y been found to be most improbable. Since the adoption of more 
sophisticated experimental techniques, phoneticians have found that it is 
not the case that every syllable has a concomitant 'chest pulse'. 
Ladefoged's experiments led to his concluding that ' ••• every stress is 
accompanied by an extra increase of subglottal pressure' (Ladefoged 
1967:46); in other words, Stetson's 'chest pulse' was occurring on stressed 
syllables alone. 
This would have been an ideal candidate for the physiological 
definition of stress, were it not for later experiments by Ohala and by Van 
Katwijk, who both concluded that the only significantly greater- than-
normal decreases in lung vol ume occurred dur ing those stressed syllables 
that were emphatically stressed (Van Katwijk 1974, cited by Ohala 1977) . 
Van Katwijk, working with Dutch speakers, and Ohala, working with English 
speakers and a Swedish speaker and using a whole- body pressure 
plethysmograph, found no appreciably greater- than- normal decrease in lung 
volume on non-emphatically stressed syllables. So it seems that the 
action of the respiratory muscles cannot give a reI iable cue to stress . 
6 
This conclusion would disappoint the large number of earlier workers 
who identified stress with greater muscular effort, though without 
performing physiological experiments to investigate the assumption. The 
earliest statement of this position within the modern trad ition of 
phonetics is probabl y that of Sweet, who defined stress as the' comparati ve 
force with which the separate syllables of a sound-group are pronounced' 
(Sweet 1878: paragraph 263). The same view was taken by subsequent 
scholars such as Abercrombie (1923:19 ), Palm er and Blandford (1924:5 ), 
Bloomfield (1933:110-11 1), Jones (1950 3rd. edn.:137), Trager and Smith 
(1951), Kingdon (1958: 1), O'Connor and Arnold (1961, 1973 2nd. edn.:287), 
Lieberman (1967:144), Catford (1968:317), and Allen (1973:77). A recent, 
and more sophisticated statement of the same position is that of 
Sommerstein, who writes: 
' ••• the hearer is using all available information to determine the 
degree of muscular effort with which each syllable was uttered , and 
what we call stress corresponds not to the data he uses or any part 
of it, but to the conclusions he reaches.' (Sommerstein 1977:36) 
Such a view may reflect the results of modern research which rejects a 
simplistic v iew of increased muscular effort lead ing directl y to 
increased intensity as the sole cue to stress. However, the primary 
factor in the definition of stress is still seen as muscular effort, the 
'production aspect' of increased intensity. Some workers in this field, on 
the other hand, consider the perceptual correlate - increased loudness -
to be the primary cue to stress, and are less concerned about the 
physiological or articulatory origins of this increased loudness. 
1.2.2.2. Perception aspect 
The view of stress as mainly increased muscular effort implies a 
consequent increase in loudness, but this is seen merel y as a by-prod uct . 
Some, however, view the increase in loudness as the primary criterion of 
stress, for example Pike (1945: section 4.4.7.), Malmberg (1963:80) , and 
Crystal, whose definition of stress is: 'Perceivable increase in loudness 
accompanied by unmarked pitch movement' (Crystal 1969:158) - Le. an 
increase in intensity that is not also intonationally prominent. This 
reference to pitch movement reflects the general consensus that, of the 
acoustic correlates of stress discovered for English, Fo/pitch variation 
7 
is by far the most reliable, though by no means the only, cue. The next 
section describes some of the ex perimental results that have led to the 
adoption of this view. 
1.2.3 Stress as pitch 
1.2.3.1. Production aspect: the "larynx versus lungs" controversy 
The question of whether Fo changes were caused by the laryngeal muscles 
('larynx' view) or by the pulmonary muscles leading to an increase in 
subglottal pressure (' lung' view), caught the attention of phoneticians 
after the publication of a version of Lieberman's doctoral thesis in 1961 
as the book 'Intonation, Perception, and Language'. In this book Lieberman 
posits the 'archetypal normal breath-group' as being characteristic of 
those patterns used to delimit the boundaries of unemphatic, declarative 
sentences in normal speech. This type of breath- group, in American 
English at least, shows a fall in both Fo and amplitude at the end of a 
sentence. In yes-no questions, the pitch rises at the end of a sentence, 
and Lieberman concedes that this pitch variation is caused by changes in 
the tensioning of the laryngeal muscles. For all other pitch changes, 
however, he firmly upholds his theory that their sole source is the 
pulmonary musculature, writing: 'The speaker simply maintains about the 
same laryngeal tension throughout the entire expiration' (Lieberman 
1961:26). The effect of this constant laryngeal tension (in American 
English), states Lieberman, is that there is no compensation for the fall 
in subglottal pressure (henceforth s .g.p.) at the end of an utterance, and 
thus the Fo also falls; while pitch rises are caused by the peak in s.g.p. 
near the end of the breath- group. [1 ] 
This view has been challenged since, especially by ex perimental 
phoneticians who question Lieberman's assumption that the laryngeal 
[1] In British English, he writes, the tension of the laryngeal muscles is 
gradually relaxed in a controlled way through the breath- group, while 
the s.g.p. rises and then falls as in the American pattern. The net 
effect is of initial high pitch (tense laryngeal muscles, medium 
s.g.p.), remaining high through the main part of the breath group 
(less tense laryngeal muscles, high s.g.p.), then showing a marked drop 
in pitch towards the end of the breath group (relax ed laryngeal 
muscles, low s.g.p.). 
8 
r 
muscles remain at a constant tension in American English. However, even 
before publication of Lieberman's claims, there had been much evidence to 
support the 'larynx' view. Such evidence took various forms, e.g.-
a) The observation that the larynx moved up and down in the neck during Fo 
changes suggested that it was somehow involved in these changes; 
b) A common clinical observation was that paral ysis of some lar yngeal 
muscles often led to defects in pitch control, while respiratory paralysis 
had no such effect; 
c) Direct electromyographic recordings of the activity of the laryngeal 
muscles during stead y-state phonation or during sing ing showed the 
laryngeal muscles to be very active during Fo variations - it was assumed 
that the same would hold for speech conditions; 
d) In experiments where subjects produced a steady- state vowel at a 
constant pitch while receiving slight pushes on the chest at unexpected 
moments, the pushes produced brief involuntary increases in s.g.p. which 
prod uced brief Fo increases - the s.g.p. effect on Fo could then be 
calibrated. After using these cal ibrations to factor out that (small) 
part of the Fo contour of samples of connected speech which was probably 
due to s.g.p. variations, it was concluded that most Fo changes in speech 
were due to the action of the laryngeal muscles. 
After publication of Lieberman's claims, more specific work was done to 
examine the relative contribution of s.g.p. and the laryngeal musculature 
to Fo changes. The general conclusion was that, while an increase in s.g.p. 
indeed accompanied a rise in Fo (which often coincided with a stressed 
syllable), this increase was far too small to be a significant cause of the 
Fo rise, and that therefore the laryngeal muscles were the main cause of Fo 
. 
" variations. Ohman and Lindqvist (1966, cited in Ohala 1977) concluded 
that the change in trans- glottal pressure drop that was due to stress was 
always much smaller than that due to stop consonants; while the Fo 
changes in stressed syllables did not correlate well with the stress-
ind uced changes in tr ans- glottal pressure drop either in phase or in 
amplitude. Vanders1.ice (1967) found that the recording both of vertical 
movements of the larynx and of s.g.p. during connected speech showed the 
laryngeal movements to be in better synchronisation with the Fo changes 
than was s.g.p. Chala (1977) observes that not only is it improbable that 
9 
the s.g.p. variations could cause much of the observed Fo changes, but that 
it is also probable that, to some extent, the s.g.p. fluctuations were 
themselves caused by the laryngeal muscles' adjusting of the vocal folds, 
since an increase in the Fo of the vocal fold v ibration would red uce the 
mean glottal area, which would red uce the air flow and thus lead to 
increased s.g.p. Thus the increase in s.g.p. on a syllable with higher Fo, 
far from being the sole cause of the Fo rise, is reduced to a negligible 
contributory factor or even to nothing but a subsequent effect of the Fo 
rise. The evidence is weighted firmly against Lieberman's claims, and the 
consensus now is that 'larynx', not 'lungs', is responsible for Fo 
variations in speech. 
1.2.3.2. Perception aspect 
While the production aspect of the view of stress as significant pitch 
variation led to a controversy, there has been no such disagreement in the 
case of the perception aspect. For some time, acoustic phonetic 
experiments have been conducted with the aim of determining the acoustic 
correlates of stress in English. All have concluded that Fo change is the 
most important and consistent cue. Fry (1958) used a 'Pattern playback' 
machine to synthesise speech at a constant 120 Hz, with a 'Voback' vocoder 
to vary the Fo, and used noun/verb pairs distinguished solely by stress 
(e.g. object/ object) to elicit stress judgements from listeners. He found 
that higher Fo produced an impression of greater stress, whichever 
syllable it was on, while the magnitude of this pitch change had little 
effect on stress judgements beyond the fact that it had to be perceptible. 
He termed this the' all- or- none I effect. What was far more important than 
the amount of pitch change was its direction, in that a very large step- up 
was in more danger than an equally large step- down of being perceived as 
unnatural and therefore of confusing stress jUdgements. Fry also found 
that duration and intensity had an influence on stress judgements, the 
former more than the latter. Thus the view of stress as intensity was 
shown to have no basis in fact. The cue of Fo change could outweigh both 
the other cues in nearly all cases; he termed this cue 'sentence 
intonation', as it involved a glide in pitch on a single syllable. 
10 
Similar results were discovered by Lieberman (1960), who also used 
noun/verb pairs, but whose experiment took the form of measurement of the 
relevant acoustic p,arameters of syllables unanimously judged stressed; 
he did not attempt synthesis of these parameters. Lieberman found that 
higher Fo was the most important single acoustic correlate of stressed 
syllables. The next most important cue was the integral of the amplitude 
with respect to time (performing almost as well as the Fo cue), while 
duration, though certainly a cue to stress, was less reliable - thus 
Lieberman differs from Fry in his assessment of the importance of duration 
as a cue to stress. These results also cast doubt on the view of stress as 
intensity, since Fo here is a marginally better cue. He also discovered 
'trad ing effects' between Fo and amplitude cues, such that changes in Fo 
coherent with perceived stress could compensate for non-coherent changes 
in amplitude, and vice-versa. Despite such success in isolating reliable 
unidimensional cues to stress, however, Lieberman saw that stress 
judgements seemed to be made using several cues, and accordingly devised a 
program for mechanically recognising stressed syllables in noun/verb 
pairs which he claimed to be in agreement with perceptual stress 
judgements 99.2% of the time. This program took account not only of Fo 
change, but also of peak amplitude, the integral of the amplitude with 
respect to time, duration, and the pitch to amplitude relation (i.e. the 
'trading effects', if any). 
agrees with Fry's. 
In its main conclusions, Lieberman's work 
There are two observations to make on this approach to the definition 
of stress. First, the Fo cue is different in kind from the duration and 
intensity cues, being binary ('all-or-none') rather than scalar, as in the 
latter two cues. Fry found that duration and intensity, in the absence of 
Fo variation, had a marked effect on stress judgements, and so they must be 
considered as valid cues to stress; particularly since Lieberman found 
amplitude to be practically as important as Fo. However, neither Fry nor 
Lieberman attempted any explanation of the all-or-none effect, and no 
satisfactory explanation has been formulated since. Thus there remains a 
situation in which one acoustic cue to stress is of a radically different 
kind from the other cues, with no apparent basis for this distinction. The 
second observation is that, while Fry is commendably cautious about the 
implications of his results, emphasising the complicated interaction of a 
11 
number of cues in actual language use, and the limitations of the radical 
simplifications necessary in experimental work, Lieberman, on the other 
hand, is bolder in his claims and more confident about the ability of his 
program to locate stressed syllables in noun/verb pairs. A later 
experiment by Lieberman, however, casts doubt on the possibility of 
absol ute certainty when using onl y inherent acoustic cues to locate 
stress. 
Lieberman (1965) conducted an ex per iment to test whether the linguist 
using Trager- Smith notation makes use of any kind of 'objective' procedure 
in which he or she concentrates on the physically present acoustic signal. 
He prepared stimuli using a POVO synthesiser to give four types of 
stimulus from the original recording: 
a) Fo and amplitude information preserved and superimposed on a 
synthesised [a] vowel; 
b) Only Fo information preserved and superimposed on the synthesised [a]; 
c) Only smoothed Fo information preserved and superimposed; 
d) Only amplitude information preserved and superimposed. 
Two linguists then transcribed the resultant stimuli using the 
standard Tr ager-Smith notation, and the results were compared with the 
mechanically-obtained Fo contours. The overall finding was that the 
linguists often used their 'subj ecti vel judgement, and used the notation 
appropriate to the structure of the sentence (which could be in one of 
eight 'modes'), even where there was a different objective Fo pattern. The 
same tendenc y was found in the stress transcription, where the 
transcribing linguist seemed to be inferring the presence of secondary and 
tertiary stresses from his knowledge of the grammatical attributes of the 
words, rather than hearing these stress levels in the physical attributes 
of the speech signal. Lieberman suggests that perhaps onl y two degrees of 
stress may have acoustic correlates independent of vowel quality. This 
stance is more conservative than his earlier one, and may be a closer 
approximation to the truth, since it does not make the impossible demand 
that all stress- locating algorithms based purely on acoustic cues should 
be completely infallible. However, the fact remains that some degree of 
stress at least may be located using acoustic cues, and thus the extreme 
12 
'abstract' view is probably untenable. 
1.2.4 Stress as accent 
1.2.4.1. Accent equals stress 
Following on from the findings of acoustic studies that pointed to Fo 
as the most important cue to stress in English, Bolinger formulated his 
theory of 'pitch accent' which defines stress solely in terms of pitch 
variation. Whereas the mainstream 'British' and 'American' schools of 
thought on suprasegmental phenomena had separated stress phenomena (seen 
as intensity-based) from intonational phenomena (seen as pitch-based), 
Bolinger, on the other hand, conflated stress with intonation in his notion 
of 'accent'. In common with all other scholars at that time, he was working 
under the assumption that there existed inherent cues to stress contained 
wi thin each stressed syllable and within no unstressed syllable. His 
particular innovation was the identification of 'accent' as a candidate 
for this inherent cue. 
Bolinger's primary distinction was between 'stress' and 'accent'. His 
'stress' is the potential for accent, and is a lex ical abstraction that is 
part of the unchanging properties of a word. His 'accent' is the 
realisation of this potential for prominence on a particular syllable in a 
particular utterance. Thus Bolinger's 'accent' is what most prev ious 
scholars had been investigating under the name of 'stress'. 'Accent' takes 
the form of pitch obtrusion or pitch change, which can be of three kind s; 
A, B, or C. 
a) Accent A shows a marked pitch drop during or immediately after the 
accented syllable. 
b) Accent B, on the other hand, shows a marked pitch rise, either 
during/immediately after the accented syllable, or from the preceding 
syllable to the accented one. 
c) Accent C shows a marked pitch drop from the preceding syllable to the 
accented syllable. (It is not clear why accents A and C are held to 
separate accents, while the analogous (rising) accents are subsumed into 
the one accent B.) 
13 
Bolinger characterises the pitch changes of the accents as being 'all-
or-none', while pitch changes due to intonation are 'gradient'. While 
intonational pitch changes may involve large pitch differences, these 
occur on a scale (e.g. a scale of 'degree of finality'), and at no point on 
this scale does the accent change its type. This distinction is similar 
to Crystal's distinction between the 'simple' and 'complex' pitch-range 
systems (Crystal 1969:141). 
Al though 801 inger seems to define the three accents purel y in terms of 
pitch patterns, in practice other factors may be considered, e.g. 
'contex tual red tmd anc y', phonetic red uction of a vowel, duration, and 
listener's knowledge of the language. He sees duration as being 
subordinate to and co-variable with accent, in that a certain amount of 
duration is required for pitch obtrusion to be executed at all (801inger 
1958: 138). In the case of potentially ambiguous pitch patterns, where 
there are two possible 'corners', either of which may be the significant 
one, 801 inger writes: 
'The fact that the linguistic signal is mixed does not refute it, 
but simply means that under the circumstances the hearer looks to 
another cue' (op. cit.:130-131). 
This cue is 'contextual redundancy', the accent being deduced to lie on 
the stressed syllable of the word which contains new information. He adds 
that in place of or along with the contextual cue, the unaccented syllable 
may be 'phonetically degraded', and in this case the accent is thrown onto 
the other word. He writes: 
'In this sense, the allegro and lento forms of words perform an 
accentual function. Normally an accented syllable must not be 
phonetically degraded' (loc. cit.). 
This sound s ver y much as though duration were challeng ing the supremac y 
of pitch, while traditional stress is creeping in by the back door and 
pragmatics is arriving on the scene quite unheralded. But since 8o1inger 
does not explicitly justify this unlooked-for deviation from his pitch-
based definition of the accents, it is not a straightforward matter to 
work out what he is actually doing with the accents. Ladd, however, argues 
(1980: chapter 2) that 80linger does indeed define prominence 
independently of pitch movement, in that he makes implicit use of other 
14 
criter ia besides pitch movement. 
suggests that it may well be), 
If this is true (and the evidence 
then the distinction between the 
'trad itional' and 'pi tch-accent' anal yses of suprasegmental s breaks down, 
since all pitch movement will correspond only to intonation, and 
stress/prominence will be defined on a separate basis. In such a 
situation, Bolinger's 'pitch accents' become entities of the same order as 
the British school 'nuclear tones' (e.g. fall, fall-rise, low rise); that 
is to say, they become pitch movements that are merel y associated with an 
already prominent/stressed syllable, rather than pitch movements that 
define this prominence in the first place. 
1.2.4.2. Accent equals stress-plus-more 
A possible source of confusion is provided by Crystal's (1969) use of 
the terms 'stress' and 'accent', where the distinction is not at all of the 
same kind as Bolinger's. For Crystal, stress and intonation are separate, 
and stress and accent both make use of a 'bundle' of the phonetic features 
of pitch, intensity, and duration; the difference lies in 'which of the 
attributes of sound is the perceptually most dominant feature of 
utterance' (Crystal 1969:120). For stress, the dominant perceptual 
component is loudness, an increase in which can allow a syllable to 
achieve a certain (minor) degree of prominence in the sentence. For 
accent, the dominant perceptual component is pitch, in the form of a 
'linguistically marked' pitch movement which lend s the syllable a major 
degree of prominence suited to its greater 'emphasis' or information value; 
concomitant features of accent are the presence of a degree of stress and 
any other prosodic or segmental factors, such as relative sonority of 
sounds or durational variation. Thus, for Crystal, 'accent' refers to the 
prominent syllables of words with greatest information value and includes 
stress, while 'stress' has nothing to do with lexical abstractions (unlike 
Bolinger's view) but instead refers to the prominent syllables of words 
with any degree of information value; words with no information value at 
all are unstressed. 
The difference in usage here may perhaps reflect the different emphases 
of the two traditions; the British school (to which Crystal belongs) has 
tended to concentrate on developing a system to represent the prosodic 
15 
features of an utterance that will prove useful in the teaching of English 
to foreigners. To this end, much work has been done on developing a 
workable intonation ,transcription system that is reliable in most 
contexts, easy to master, quick to write, and not too encumbered with 
detail (see O'Connor and Arnold 1961 for a classic example of this 
approach). The American school (with which Bolinger may be associated due 
to its probable influence on his early years as a linguist) has tended to 
concentrate, on the other hand, on more sophisticated theoretical models 
of prosodic phenomena. To this end, much work has been done on the status 
of intonation with regard to segmental phenomena (e.g. whether there is 
such a thing as a pitch- level phoneme) and, since ease of use was not the 
main concern, articles in this tradition fairly bristle with superscript 
numbers and juncture and boundary symbols, as well as four different kinds 
of stress mark. 
Crystal's use of the terms 'stress' and 'accent' is paralleled by others 
within the British tradition, who equate 'accent' with 'stress- plus- pitch-
prominence', and 'stress' merely with increased loudness; e.g. O'Connor and 
Arnold's statement that 'Pitch as well as stress is involved in the 
recognition of accent' (O'Connor and Arnold, 2nd. edn. 1973:31). However, 
Bolinger's distinction remains a useful one, and if it had become more 
widely used, it would have obviated the need for such phrases as 
'stressable syllable' or 'lex ically stressed syllable', which are not as 
theoretically well- defined. 
1.2.5 Stress as a component of rhythm 
1. 2.5.1. Isochrony 
A phenomenon closely related to stress that has been studied for 
centuries is rhythm or, to be precise, isochrony. Isochrony is the 
condition whereby a given type of unit (for English, a stressed syllable) 
occurs at equal intervals of time however many other units of a different 
type (unstressed syllables) lie in between . This means that, for English, 
interstress intervals containing few syllables may show marked 
lengthening of those syllables, while interstress intervals containing 
very many syllables may show marked shortening and reduction of those 
16 
syllables, if isochrony could be shown to exist. 
It is generally accepted that there is no perfect isochrony in English, 
not even in the most 'rhythmic verse. The range of possible durations of 
interstress intervals (or' feet') is far too large for absol ute, obj ecti ve 
isochrony to be a tenable view. In actual utterances, interstress 
intervals can vary in length by as much as 6:1 (Buxton 1983:112). The most 
that can be said on the objective level is that there may be a tendency 
towards isochrony, and therefore a valid basis for the characterisation of 
English as a 'stress-timed' language (see Pike 1945 for the first use of 
this term); while, on the subjective level, hearers may subconsciously 
normalise quite large discrepancies in duration to arrive at an impression 
of isochrony only loosely based on fact. This latter view is the one 
currently gaining favour, as will be seen from a brief summary of 
experimental work on isochrony. 
1.2.5.2. Experimental findings 
A lucid and exhaustive review of past work on the subject may be found 
in Lehiste (1977); onl y the main lines of argument will be presented here. 
Isochrony in production has been found to be unreliable at best; there 
is certainly no absolute isochrony, and even a tendency towards isochrony 
may at times be so faint as to be almost undetectable. Some workers (e.g. 
Shen and Peterson 1962) have rejected altogether the validity of isochrony 
in production for English; while others give only a qualified assent, 
such as Classe, who states that isochrony in English ex ists only in ver y 
favourable circumstances, viz.: 
'the groups [i.e. feet] concerned must not contain very different 
numbers of syllables; the phonetic structure of the component 
syllables must not differ too widely; the grammatical connexion 
between the groups and the grammatical structure of these groups 
must be similar' (Classe 1939:85). 
The problem with isochrony in production is the difficulty of 
measurement; the techniques employed until now have been somewhat crude 
statistically speaking, and thus there is no way of telling what counts as 
a significant tendency and what is a chance artefact. More refined 
statistical techniques are only beginning to be employed, and are able to 
UNl~SlTY 
LIBRARY 
CAMBRIDGE 
show up phenomena that before would have gone unnoticed; hence Buxton's 
justified complaint that descriptions of temporal structure in speech 
'have been limited to approximate claims about a "tendency to isochrony'" 
(Buxton 1983: 119). In section 2 of the present study, statistic?ll 
techniques are employed that make clear the underlying patterns and 
tendencies that cannot be seen on the surface. While these techniques are 
by no means advanced from a statistician's point of view, they are 
nonetheless an improvement on most of what has gone before. 
Isochrony in perception has been found to be much easier to demonstrate 
than isochrony in production. First, Lehiste found (op. cit.) that many of 
the durational differences between feet found in the production of some 
'four-measure sentences' were actually below the threshold of perception 
and therefore quite irrelevant for linguistic purposes. Since the 
threshold of perception of differences in foot lengths for speech stimuli 
was found by her to be markedly higher than for non-speech stimuli 
(Lehiste 1975 b), the odds are weighted in favour of perceptual isochrony 
even before the utterance is produced. If the utterance, once produced, is 
not exaggeratedly rhythmic, some of the foot length differences will be 
above this perceptual threshold for speech stimuli and thus potentially 
perceivable as non-isochronous. However, there is a further safeguard 
buil t in; the listener quite often subj ecti vel y imposes a rhythmic 
structure on such feet, when there is a momentum of rhythm sufficient to 
override the perceivable duration differences. Thus the listener 
perceives the rhythm as isochronous when in fact it may be very far from 
being so. 
This is the phenomenon known to psychologists as 'subjective rhythm', 
which has been well documented (see G.D. AlIen 1975 for a review of work in 
this field). There are two aspects of subjective rhythm: 
a) Imposing a rhythmic structure on a sequence of identical pulses, so 
that some pulses sound subjectively more prominent; 
b) Under- and overestimating the duration of long and short time intervals 
respectively, to 'normalise' subjectively towards isochrony. 
18 
G. D. Allen (op. cit.) observes that listeners tend to adjust their 
perception of the duration of intervals towards an average duration. 
Taken together with the tendency to impose a subjective rhythm on any 
sequence of intervals, whether equal or not, this tendency to even out the 
durations contributes to the perception of regular rhythm in languages, 
such as English, which have a 'stress accent' rather than a 'pitch accent' -
i.e. where pitch change is not the only indication of prominence. 
Even after subjective rhythm has been imposed, however, there will 
al ways be at least a few isolated feet which upset the pattern rad ically 
and break the minimum of rhythmic momentum necessary for subjective rhythm 
to be imposed successfully. In such a case, it could be that there remains 
an overall impression of isochrony in the utterance as a whole, due less to 
any isochrony actually found than to the movement in the direction of 
isochrony that may lie below the surface. Since the factors constraining 
the duration of segments are fairly well known, for many segments (see 
Lehiste 1970 for a summary) , it is possible to identify mod ifications in 
these constraints in a particular direction, e.g. that of isochrony. Such 
adjustments are actually made in production by speakers, who partially 
modify the duration of some speech sounds and their sequences in the 
direction toward s isochrony, leav ing the listener's subj ecti ve sense of 
rhythm to take its cue from these modifications and create an impression 
of isochrony (Rapp 1971, Lehiste 1975a) . The situation is summed up 
neatl y by Barnwell, who writes: 
'The implication is that speech attempts to be very rhythmic, but 
fails because of durational constraints. Hence it may be that what 
is heard as rhythmic may be really the interpretation of changes in 
duration in the direction of true rhythm. Hence, just as the 
perception of pitch is not necessarily directly related to Fo, so 
the perception of rhythm may not be directly related to true time 
intervals in speech.' (Barnwell 1971:88) 
Thus isochrony may be seen as a real component of English 
suprasegmental structure, but only with the qualification that the 
regularity resides mainly in the mind of the hearer (and possibly of the 
speaker also). The objective correlate of isochrony is never perfectly 
realised, and can only be said to be present in a virtual form as the 
target towards which move certain articulatory durational adjustments. 
19 
This insight of an undercurrent of rhythm in English forms the core of the 
'metrical' theory of stress, first formulated in Liberman 1975 and 
developed in many subsequent articles by various scholars, notably in 
Liberman and Prince 1977. Metrical phonology attempts to state the 
suprasegmental structure of English in terms of a hierarchy of strong/weak 
relations, defined on units of at least one syllable. The binary-
branching nature of this structure reflects Liberman's claim that the 
fundamental distinction in metrical structure is a binary one between 
'strong' and 'weak', where these labels refer to a complex phonetic and 
phonological entity that has only indirect repercussions on the physical 
level. The main feature of this structure is that it is relational; that 
is, units are not inherentl y and unchangeabl y either strong or weak, but 
take their labels from their relationship with a comparable unit. 
Liberman separates stress from intonation, thus agreeing with both the 
British and the American traditional schools of thought. Where he parts 
company with traditional views is that, while he sees intonation as based 
on pitch change, his view of stress is based on rhythm. Previously it had 
been held that rhythm was based on stress; but Liberman turns the 
relationship on its head by saying, effecti vel y, that rhythm is stress. 
The following section (1.2.6. ) gives a very brief outline of the main 
features of metrical phonology, while chapter 3 contains both an 
ex posi tion and a refinement of it based on subsequent work. 
1.2.6 Stress as rhythm: the Rmetrical" theory of stress 
1.2.6.1. Metrical theory and the cycle 
Liberman discusses Chomsky and Halle's 'Nuclear Stress Rule' which 
applies cyclically, reassigning [1 stress] to the stressed syllable of 
each word and subordinating all [1 stress] vowels to the left within the 
domain of application of the rule (Chomsky and Halle 1968). He then shows 
how the metrical theory can account for the same data, but in a much 
simpler way, in that the latter theory has no need for the cyclic 
principle, for the principle of stress subordination, nor for the variable 
in the formulation of the rule, and also needs no ordering of the 
constituent rules since it applies at all levels simultaneously. This is 
seen in a comparison of the two types of rule: 
20 
Chomsky and Halle Nuclear Stress Rule 
a) word stress rules: assumed 
b) Nuclear Stress Rule: I" V l---> 1 stress I_QJ 
. l1 stres~ 
(applies only to phrasal constituents) 
condition: Q contains no 1 stress 
c) Principle of cyclic application of NSR 
d) Principle of stress subordination: when primary stress is placed 
in a certain position, then all other stresses in the str ing 
under consideration at that point are automatically 
weakened by one degree. 
Liberman Nuclear Stress Rule 
a) word stress rules: assumed 
b) Nuclear Stress Rule (applies only to phrasal nodes): 
In every phrasal constituent, put the strong 
position on the right. 
Formalization: N ---> S/[M J where N and M are nodes. 
A general convention of metrical phonology ensures that 
the sister node is automatically labelled 'weak' after 
the assignment of 'strong' to one node. 
(adapted from Liberman 1975: 130-1) 
The structure to which the latter rule applies is based on the 
syntactically given constituent structure. The difference between the 
two types of rule is that, whereas the Chomsky and Halle rule asssigns 
stress vowel-by-vowel and cycle-by-cycle, the Liberman rule assigns a 
pattern simultaneously to a whole structure. 
More telling still, the phonological cycle in the conventional theory 
is an optional additional assumption, not logically related to the nature 
of the particular rule involved. Thus it would be as reasonable to 
postulate it for segmental rules as it is for prosodic rules. As it is, 
prosodic phenomena are the only ones for which the cycle can be plausibly 
argued. On the other hand, the metrical theory lacks any apparatus for 
cyclic rule application, since it accounts for the 'cyclic' properties of 
prosodic phenomena on the basis that stress is a hierarchically defined 
relation. Thus the metrical theory accounts for these properties on the 
basis of the intrinsic nature of the phenomenon itself. This 
characteristic is not shared by segmental rules, since rather than 
21 
defining hierarchical relations among phonological entities, they define 
intrinsic properties of the phonological entities themselves. The 
metrical theory predicts that prosodic phenomena will, by their very 
nature, have 'cyclic' properties (i.e. the preservation of relative stress 
under embedding) but makes no pred ictions for segmental rules (see 
Liberman 1975: 129-138 for a fuller discussion of the 'cyclic' nature of the 
metrical theory, and section 3.4. of the present study for full details of 
metrical or 'prosodic' structure). 
1.2.6.2. The metrical grid 
Once the metrical structure has been assigned, on the basis of 
constituent structure and rules for nuclear stress and compound stress, 
then the 'metrical grid' is characterised. This is an abstract entity 
reflecting the metrical structure but independent of it, and thus only 
loosely tied to syntactic surface structure. It reflects the temporal 
patterning and the relative prominence of the syllables in the utterance -
in short, the rhythm. A syllable marked as prominent in the metrical grid 
is highly likely to begin a rhythmic foot and to be stressed. The 
intonation of the utterance, however, is more closely linked to the 
metr ical structure, and so is not necessar il y synchronised with the 
rhythmic patterning (see section 3.5. for a full discussion of the metrical 
grid) • 
The fact that it is the rhythmically-prominent syllables as defined by 
the metrical grid which are characterised as stressed, gives a clue as to 
the metrical theory's attitude to stress. This is seen as defined not on a 
syllable-by-syllable basis in terms of inherent acoustic properties, but 
rather in terms of the rhythmic structure of the whole utterance, apart 
from which it would make no sense to call any syllable 'stressed' - a 
viewpoint quite in accord with the relational nature of this theory, which 
defines a node as 'strong' onl y in relation to a 'weak' sister node, never 
on its own merits. Ladd (1980:26) sums up this attitude concisely by 
stating that measurements of fundamental frequency, duration, etc., 
' ••• should not be interpreted as demonstrating the acoustic 
correlates of a particular stress peak, but rather as indicating the 
sorts of acoustic features which induce us to hear an overall 
rhythmic organization which in cl udes the particular stress peak.' 
22 
In other words, stress is rhythm, and without rhythm one cannot talk 
about stress, except possibly in terms of a potentiality on the stressable 
syllable of each word. This is the insight gained from the experiments 
wi th Welsh stress described in the second chapter of this study, and it 
informs the theoretical treatment of stress in the third chapter. The 
general plan of this study is described in section 1.4. below, but first, in 
section 1. 3., some observations made in the past concerning Welsh stress 
will help to provide the background to the problem under investigation. 
1.3 Informal observations of Welsh stress 
The following points are of an informal and pre":' theoretical nature, but 
it is hoped that they will help to set the scene for those with no 
knowledge of Welsh. 
1.3. 1 \lI1elsh stress rule 
Stress in Wel sh is fixed on the penultimate syllable, for 
pol ysyllables . In the few cases where the stress does not follow this 
rule, nearly every example has stress on the final syllable. Only a very 
small minority of words have stress on a syllable before the penult; such 
word s are mainl y recent loans from English, and thus can perhaps be 
discounted as not being part of the native word-stock. 
1.3.2 lieaction of English listeners 
While non- \-lelsh- speaking English people would probably experience no 
difficulty in identifying stressed syllables in their own language, the 
situation is different when they are presented with Welsh . Rees (1977) 
remarks in a footnote that he has observed, in an informal experiment, that 
English people consistently judge the stress in Welsh to be on the final 
syllable rather than the penult, and thus are consistentl y wrong. My own 
experience bears out this observation: as a phonetically-trained English 
speaker having learned a little Welsh, I carried out an undergraduate 
study of intonation in Welsh in the framework used by O'Connor and Arnold 
(1961) for English. I quickly found that the syllables I had learned were 
23 
supposed to be stressed did not in fact sound stressed, while the 
supposedly unstressed final syllables sounded clearly stressed in very 
many cases; identifying the stressed syllables was a most unexpectedly 
difficult task. Similarly, in a study of the Cwm Tawe (Swansea Valley) 
dialect of Welsh, Watkins writes that: 
'I have also been told that to the foreign ear, unaccustomed to 
dialect Welsh, it would seem that there is a stronger stress on the 
final than the penultimate syllable' (Watkins 1953:8). 
It was this kind of observation that sparked off the present study; 
while it is not claimed that stress in Welsh is now completely accounted 
for, nevertheless much light has been thrown on the question from several 
angles. 
1.3.3 1IRobustness of the ultima 
In the available literature on the acoustic or auditory nature of Welsh 
stress (the references being both minimal and largel y imprecise), there 
seems to be some degree of agreement that the final syllable of 
polysyllables is more prominent acoustically and auditorily, and that it 
has higher pitch than the penult (Jones, D.B. 1949, Watkins 1953, 1972a, 
Thomas, C.H. 1967, Rees 1977, Griffen 1979, Thomas, A. 1979). other rather 
subj ecti ve comments are al so made; for example, Watkins (1972a) states 
that the Welsh accent is not as 'strong' or 'loud' as that of English, and 
that the stress is more evenly distributed, 'particularly as between 
penult and final'. D.B. Jones (1949) states that the stress difference 
between the penult and the ultima is small, and is much less than the 
difference between the penult and the preceding syllable(s); this, he 
writes, can be heard by the ear, and is also seen in phonetic changes due 
to the accent. Griffen (1979) sets up three phonological levels of stress 
in the word; in polysyllables, the ultima has level 2, the penult level 1 
(primary stress), the antepenult (if any) level 3, and the preantepenult 
(if an y) level 2. Thus this analysis also postulates only a small 
difference of stress between the penult and ultima. There seems to be 
only one past study of Welsh stress in acoustic terms; Watkins 1953. 
This rudimentary investigation confirms experimentally that the pitch of 
the ultima is higher than that of the penult, in some word s at least, and 
24 
also finds that the 'stress' (by which is meant greatest intensity and 
longest duration) may fall either on the penult or the ultima. Watkins 
concl udes: 
' ••• it would seem that the stress and pitch in modern Welsh 
especially in the Southern dialects are not on different syllables . 
The pitch has a tendency to follow the stress, but one thing is sure, 
and that is there is no great stress in modern Welsh. There is very 
little difference between the penultimate and final syllables, pitch 
and stress accents resting upon one or the other depending upon the 
posi tion of a word in a sentence and the importance which is 
attached to the word. It is true to say, however, that the final 
syllable is longer (comparatively) than the penult and that this is 
a contributing factor in lending it greater clarity in dialect 
words~ (Watkins 1953: 9) 
Thus the ultima is very often more prominent in phonetic terms than the 
stressed penult. This is al so true from a phonolog ical point of view: 
while the central vowel schwa is never found in the ultima, it is often 
found in non- final syllables, even in stressed penults. Similarly, the 
phenomenon of 'vowel mutation', whereby some non- final high vowels lower to 
schwa in certain contexts, never causes the vowel of the ultima to reduce 
to schwa (see Williams (in press) for an attempted explanation of this 
phenomenon). Thus the vowel of the ultima is more 'prominent' or 'robust' 
in both phonetic and phonological terms; as A. Thomas puts it, 
' ••• the ultimate syllable is often (perceptually) the stronger of 
the two [i.e. penult and ultimaJ, and always structurally the 
stronger' (Thomas, A. 1979:170). 
This is aided by the fact that the penult is very 'weak' in some sense , 
as will be seen below. 
1.3.4 Wleakness of the penult 
The stressed penult has been observed to be somewhat weak, both 
acoustically and auditorily (Jones, D.M. 1949, Watkins 1953) . It is also 
weak structurally; in rapid speech the penult of some weakly- stressed 
disyllables can be lost altogether, while their final syllables are never 
lost, in cases where the vowel of the ultima is 'of greater natural 
sonority' than that of the penult (Jones, op. cit.) - e.g .: 
eto ---> 'to ('yet') IEbl ---> 
25 
I 
................................................ ~r 
yma 
---> 
yna 
---> 
dyna 
---> 
acw ---> 
'ma ('here') 
'na (' ther e' ) 
'na ('there isl are') 
'cw ('yonder') 
Ig mal ---> 
Ig mal ---> 
Idanal ---> 
lak~1 ---> 
Imal 
Inal 
Inal 
IkCJI 
This observation is confirmed by Watkins (1953), who adds his own 
examples, and also gives cases where the stressed penult, though not lost, 
at least has its vowel red uced to schwa before a long consonant or 
consonant cl uster . In dialect Welsh, the vowel of the penult can 
sometimes change its quality, shifting to a rounded vowel under the 
infl uence of a following labial stop; this does not occur in the final 
syllable (Watkins, op . cit.). Jones sees this weakness of the penult as a 
relic of the Old Welsh Accent Shift which, he writes, left a high pitch 
accent on the ultima while the 'stress element' shi fted to the penult . He 
writes; 'No doubt the frequently higher pitch of the final syllable plays 
a part in this process' (Jones, D.M. 1949). Watkins sees the Accent Shift 
in different terms; he writes that, in Old Welsh, the stress was evenly 
distributed on all the syllables of polysyllables, with higher pitch on 
the ultima. The Accent Shift was not so much a shift as a gradually-
developing stress on the penult, wi th higher pitch remaining on the ultima 
(Watkins, 1972a) . However, the general agreement is that nowadays the 
final syllable is very often both phonetically (in acoustic and auditory 
terms) and phonologically (in structural and performance terms) in some 
way 'stronger' or more prominent than the stressed penult. 
1.4 Plan of the thesis 
The second chapter of this thesis concerns a series of measurements and 
experiments undertaken to ascertain the acoustic nature of stress in 
Welsh . Both rehearsed and unrehearsed data are used, as well as 
perceptual experiments, and the same general results obtained for each, 
suggesting that the findings are indeed related to what happens in actual 
language use . An attempt has been made to provide a rather more rigorous 
s tatistical treatment than has been usual in earlier stUdies of stress, 
and i t is this statistical treatment that shows up tendencies which would 
have been almost impossible to discover in any other fashion. 
26 
The third chapter of the thesis concerns the development of a 
theoretical model of stress that will be appropriate to the experimental 
results. The theory is based on Liberman's 'metrical' theory of stress, but 
incorporates refinements suggested by Selkirk, and also modifies it 
further to allow the theory to take account of semantics. 
The initial exposition of this modified theory is carried out in terms 
of English, in order to demonstrate the workings of the theory in terms of 
a language known by all readers, and also to show that the theory is at 
least descriptively adequate for English. After the initial exposition, 
some puzzles in English intonation are tackled. These puzzles, set in an 
O'Connor and Arnold type of framework, are shown to be more easily 
explained using this modified 'metrical' approach. The theory is then 
applied to modern Welsh, which turns out to be a little simpler than 
English owing to the fixed nature of stress in Welsh. Thus the theory may 
be more immediately suited to Welsh than to English, particularly since 
experimental results support the application of this theory to Welsh (in 
chapter 2), while no such concrete evidence can be cited for applying the 
theory to English. Be that as it may, it is suggested that the theory 
provides a simpler and neater account of the facts, for both Welsh and 
English. 
The fourth chapter of this study discusses the implications of the 
experimental findings for the theory of stress in general. It is 
discovered that the ramifications spread far beyond the Welsh language, 
and may influence our assumptions of what constitutes 'stress' in a 
language. In this respect, the present study is not relevant merely to 
Welsh (though it throws much light on old puzzles in that language), but 
has a far wider application that concerns the theory of stress in any 
language of the world. 
27 
2. EXPERIMENTAL WORK 
2. 1 Word s in citation form 
2.1.1 tim 
The aim of this first set of measurements was to discover what, if any, 
were the acoustic correlates of stress in Welsh. This was envisaged as 
being of the same order as stress in other languages that have been 
investigated in the past, such as English, French or Polish, where 
increases in certain intrinsic acoustic properties can be shown to 
coincide reliably with a stressed syllable. 
2.1.2 lI'nethod 
A recording was made of a male native (South ) Welsh speaker read ing 
from a prepared list. The subject was placed in an acoustically-treated 
recording studio, and read into an AKG 451 microphone leading to an Ampex 
AG440 open-reel tape recorder. 
The list contained both isolated Welsh polysyllables, and a few Welsh 
polysyllables embedded in a frame sentence that placed the word in 
question in nuclear position after a momentary pause. The frame sentence 
in question was: 'Dyd i hi ddim yn ddigon i YSGRIFENNU " ••• '" (/d~dI hI ~hm 
;)n ~ig~ n I sgriven;j, ••• 1, 'It's not enough to WRITE " ••• '" ) . Thus the words 
used were in citation form and carried the intonational nucleus, in most 
cases . Twenty words were used in all; naturally, this number was not 
enough to give a detailed account of stress in Welsh, but was sufficient to 
make plain the main trends. 
Two non-Welsh-speaking English speakers and a Welsh speaker (not the 
recorded subject ) then listened separately to the tape and made stress 
28 
judgements for each word. In the few cases where one or both of the 
English speakers found it impossible to make a judgement, the word in 
question was not counted in the subsequent analysis. Sound-spectrograms 
were made of each word, using a Kay Electronics 7029A 'Sonagraph', and 
making both wide-band and narrow-band spectrograms. Measurements were 
made by hand from these spectrograms, and various calculations made. 
The division of the speech signal into segments was made on the basis 
of the wide-band spectrogram; for the purposes of measurement, it was 
decided that a phone would be said to have begun only when it showed a 
clear pattern of voicing, formant structure, or silence, as appropriate. 
There was necessarily some idealisation at this stage, but the precision 
of measurement was not of the highest degree, and so it was felt that such 
considerations would make little difference to the results. The mean 
amplitude was estimated by eye from the narrow-band amplitude display, a 
horizontal line being drawn as an attempted best mean of the variations in 
amplitude (which were surprisingly small in most cases, since sudden sharp 
peaks were rare). The area bounded by this line of mean amplitude, pI us 
the baseline and the start and end of the segment as defined on the basis 
of the wide-band spectrogram, was designated the 'overall' or 'envelope' 
ampli tude, informall y speaking; it was ho ped that this was a fair 
approximation to Lieberman's 'integral of the amplitude with respect to 
time' (Lieberman 1960). 
In considering the stress of the words, only the vowel stretches were 
measured, firstly for reasons of ease of measurement, and secondly since 
Fry (1958) had found that, in English words, the stress was carried almost 
entirely by the vowel stretches of the signal. He had accordingly varied 
only the vowel portions in his subsequent experiments with synthesised 
speech, and this produced no results which might have called the procedure 
into question. 
When measuring changes in fundamental frequency (Fo) within a single 
syllable, such a change was only acknowledged if the Fo change (in either 
direction) was greater than or equal to 15 Hz. This was mainly due to the 
poor precision of the measuring technique (use of a roamer to estimate Fo 
from the frequencies of the higher harmonics); however, this restriction 
29 
has the advantage that a change in Fo of 15 Hz or more would most probably 
be perceptible, while a smaller change might well go unnoticed in a rapid 
conversational situation, and thus would be irrelevant for linguistic 
purposes. 
2.1.3 Results 
The results of these measur ements are presented graphically in Fig . 1, 
which shows the properties of syllables judged stressed by each listener. 
The twelve' acoustic parameters' are as follows: 
1: shorter duration of vowel 
2: lower estimated amplitude integral of vowel 
3: Fo change (within vowel) of less than 15 Hz 
4: higher Fo at start of vowel 
5: greater mean amplitude of vowel 
6: greater peak amplitude of vowel 
7: lower peak amplitude of vowel 
8: lower mean amplitude of vowel 
9: lower Fo at start of vowel 
10: Fo change (within vowel) greater than 15 Hz 
11: greater estimated amplitude integral of vowel 
12: longer duration of vowel 
In each case, the comparison is made between the given vowel and the 
other syllable (s) of the same word. It will be noted that hal f of the 
above acoustic parameters are the converse of the other hal f; this is 
because, although in nearly all cases the value for a cue is easily 
deducible from that of its complement, the few cases of equality between 
two vowels in one or other of the acoustic dimensions made it necessary to 
include converse cues as well. The words in question are all regularly 
stressed (i.e. on the penult); this restriction is introduced since an 
informal, similar, test suggested that stressed final syllables in Welsh 
show quite a different pattern of acoustic cues from stressed penultimate 
syllables, and thus it would be wiser to concentrate on the more common 
type of stress pattern. 
30 
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
In 
ClI 
In 
0 
U 
-
40 
0 
ClI 
0'1 
0 
..-
c 30 ClI 
u 
... 
ClI 
0... 
20 
10 
Fig.1 
Properties of syllables judged stressed by three 
li steners 
--- ::Welsh listener 
-.- = 1st English llstener 
--e-:: 2nd English listener 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 3 10 11 12 
Acoustic param eters (see text) 
31 
2.1.4 Discussion 
The most striking feature of Fig. 1 is the sharp contrast in general 
tendency between the two English listeners and the Welsh listener. The 
English listeners, following the cues for stress in English, interpreted 
as stressed those Welsh syllables which had one or more of the 'standard' 
cues: Fo change (glide or step), greater amplitude, or longer duration. 
On the other hand, the syllables judged stressed by a Welsh speaker had the 
opposite attributes. To make matters more confusing, it was found that 
the final, supposedly unstressed, syllable of these polysyllables almost 
always had longer duration, a pitch glide, and greater envelope amplitude. 
This was the syllable typically chosen as stressed by the two English 
listeners, thus supporting the informal observations described in section 
1.3.2. earlier. 
The implications of this result are that the commonly-accepted view of 
stress (as intrinsic acoustic cues) will not do for Welsh; the basis of 
stress in Welsh is of a different kind. However, it should be borne in 
mind that this was merely a limited and preliminary experiment. 
2.2 Connected speech 
2.2.1 Unrehearsed speech: segmental measurements 
2.2.1.1. Aim 
Since the preceding experiment was merely of a preliminary nature, it 
was decided to check its findings in the case of words in connected speech, 
i.e. not in citation form and not necessarily in nuclear position. The 
first type of connected speech to be investigated was (relatively) 
spontaneous speech, in order to find out whether the above findings held 
for Welsh outside experimental conditions. 
32 
2.2.1.2. Method 
Recordings were made of Welsh speakers at the 1981 National Eisteddfod 
at Machynlleth, using 'a Sony TeM 260 portable cassette tape-recorder with 
separate microphone. Because of the recording conditions (crowded field 
background noise to a) poor-quality loudspeaker b) single Welsh speaker c) 
tape/slide presentation), the quality of the recording was poor. However, 
the main acoustic features were recoverable from spectrograms. Engl ish 
listeners' judgements could not be tested, since a non-Welsh speaker could 
not have divided each utterance into words. 
As before, sound-spectrograms were made of twenty-four of the more 
intelligible sentences and long phrases. The same measurements were made 
as before, with the exception of the Fo change within the vowel, which 
could not be measured in these utterances. Of these twenty-four samples, 
twelve were spoken by the master of ceremonies on the platform in the main 
pavilion (these are mainly words of thanks and scene-setting, in a 
slightly formulaic style but not read from a script); four of the samples 
were taken from a tape/slide presentation of the abbeys of Wales (though 
not colloquial in style, these utterances were spoken fluently); and 
eight of the samples were spoken by a middle-aged female native speaker 
who held a short conversation (this lady turned out to have strong views 
on the subj ect of the Wel sh language, and thus her speech was highl y likel y 
to be without influence from English). The vocabulary and grammatical 
structures used in these samples were mainly of an everyday kind. 
2.2.1.3. Results 
The results are presented in graphical form in Fig. 2, in the same 
format as before (minus parameters 3 and 10). The number of words 
measured was forty-six. Only non-prepausal and regularly-stressed words 
are represented, since prepausal and irregularly-stressed words (i.e. with 
stress on the ultima) show marked deviations from this pattern. 
Superimposed on these results is the line representing the properties of 
syllables judged stressed by the Wel sh listener in the first set of 
measurements. Fig. 3 shows a wide-band and a narrow-band spectrogram, with 
amplitude display, of one of the unrehearsed utterances, as an example of 
the type of recording quality obtained. 
33 
Fi g. 2 
Properties of stressed syllables in two sets of measurements 
100 
---
= Results from 1st set of 
measurements 
90 -*- = Results from 2nd set of 
mea s ureme nts 
( parameters 3 and 10 could 
80 not be measured in the 
2nd set) 
70 
\ 
60 \ \ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
50 \ VI \ Cl) 
\ \ VI 
~ \ \ 
u \ \ 
\ 
- 40 \ 0 \ 
\ 
Cl) \ . 01 
0 
-c 
Cl) 30 (,) 
1-
<1l 
0.. 
20 
10 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 
Acoustic parameters (see text) 
34 
'.' t I , ':.- l" \ 
j.'<'l.~: '~~..1 _~ , 
t. 
t<'I 
• b.O 
.,-1 
~ 
, · 35 
The pattern for this second set of measurements is not as clear-cut as 
in the first set, but the same trend is present; the stressed vowel is the 
one with shorter duration and greater peak and mean amplitude. The only 
major difference between the two sets of measurements was that the results 
for the second set ind icated that the envelope amplitude af the vowel 
(parameter 2), and a step-up in Fo (parameter 4), were most unrel iable cues 
to stress or the lack of it. By far the most consistent cue was the 
shorter duration of the stressed vowel; this was seen even in the less 
distinct results of the second set of measurements. 
2.2.1.4. Discussion 
The find ing s of the first set of measurements seem to be not just a 
feature of the citation forms of word s, since their general trend is 
reproduced in the second set, using fluent connected speech. Thus the 
main points can be regarded as real features of the stressed penult in 
Welsh; i.e. shorter duration, lower amplitude integral (probably 
influenced by the shorter duration), and lack of any great consistency in 
the cues of Fo, mean amplitude and peak amplitude. This situation is most 
peculiar when compared with the acoustic features of stress in English, 
where shorter duration and lower amplitude integral (consistent cues in 
Welsh) would most often. betoken lack of stress, while the cues of Fo, mean 
and peak amplitude would be very reliable cues to stress in English, 
unlike their status in Welsh. It indeed seems that any acoustic cue to 
stress in Welsh must be sought in a different area entirely. 
2.2.2 Unrehear sed speech: foot measurements 
2.2.2.1. Aim 
Since vowel duration (or rather, the lack of it) had been found to be 
such a reliable cue to stress in Welsh, it was decided to investigate 
timing phenomena more closely. However, since intrinsic cues had failed 
so convincingly (in the case of penults) to provide a definition of the 
real isation of stress in Wel sh, the aspect of the speech signal to be 
examined next was relational rather than inherent. This investigation 
centred on temporal phenomena in a wider domain than that of the syllable 
- i.e. rhythmic phenomena. 
36 
2.2.2.2. Method 
The spectrograms of connected speech described in section 2.2.1. were 
used, together with the -stress judgements made by the native Welsh speaker. 
The stretches between the onset of each stressed vowel were measured, 
these stretches being referred to as 'feet'. For each foot, a note was also 
made of the number of syllables contained in it, and the mean duration of 
the syllables in a particular foot was calculated by dividing the foot 
length by the number of syllables in it. Thus the three variables in 
question were: length of foot, number of syllables in foot, and length of 
syllable. 
Two different kinds of measurement were carried out, corresponding to 
two different hypotheses concerning the identification of the stressed 
syllable in Welsh. Under the first hypothesis, the penultimate syllables 
judged as stressed were counted as stressed for the purposes of foot 
demarcation; while under the second hypothesis, their corresponding final 
syllables werecounted as stressed. The resulting feet could be termed a 
'Welsh speaker's foot' and an 'English speaker's foot' respectively, with 
stressed monosyllables counting as stressed under both hypotheses. 
2.2.2.3. Results 
The resulting measurements were anal ysed using the SAS (Statistical 
Analysis System) package on the Cambridge University IBM 3081 mainframe 
computer. This gave the (product-moment ) correlation coefficients over 
both prepausal and non-prepausal feet, as shown in the table below. 
37 
correlation of: 
Two types of foot measur ements 
'Wel sh speaker 's 
foot' 
'English speaker 's 
foot' 
--------------------- + -------------------- + --------------------
coeff. significance coeff. significance 
+ -------------------- + --------------------
length of foot:no. of 0.90 0. 0001 0.93 0.0001 
syllables in foot n = 46 n = 42 
length of syllable: - 0.37 0.0116 - 0. 23 0.1455 
no . of syllables n = 46 n = 42 
in foot 
--------------------- + -------------------- + --- -----------------
2.2.2.4. Discussion 
The results for the 'Welsh speaker's foot' showed a slight tendency for 
str essed syllables to occur at appr ox imatel y equal intervals. Al though 
the length of the foot was partly determined by the numbe r of syllables in 
the foot, there was also a tendency for the length of each syllable to be 
negati vel y correlated with the numbe r of syllables per foot. Thus the 
more syllables ther e wer e in a foot, the shor ter each syllable would 
become, on the whole, so that the interval between stressed syllables was 
not as long as it would have been were the length of the foot determined 
soleI y by the number of syllables in it. In other words, ther e was a 
distinct tendency towards isochrony. 
This was not the case, however, for the 'English speaker's foot'. As 
before, the number of syllables per foot was an important influence on 
foot length, but the negative correlation between syllable length and 
number of syllables per foot was less marked and had a much lower deg r ee 
of significance (which was, statistically speaking, not signi f icant at all 
and therefore worthless). 
The overall result is that, if the penult is counted as str essed, a much 
greater tendency towards isochrony is seen than if the more acoustically 
pr ominent ultima is counted as stressed. The 'stressedness' of the penult 
38 
in Welsh seems to be due less to its inhe~ent acoustic p~ope~ties than to 
its function as the keystone of the ~hythmic unit; this find ing could 
well have significant implications fo~ ou~ view of st~ess in gene~al. 
2.2.3 Rehearsed speech 
2.2.3.1. Aim 
Having discove~ed that the key to st~ess in Welsh lay in the rhythm of 
connected speech, the nex t step was to check this find ing fo~ a la~ge~ 
sample of speech. At the same time, it was decided to test both for any 
difference in ~hythmicality the~e might be between two diffe~ent styles of 
p~esentation of a list of sentences, and al so to test fo~ any effects the~e 
might be due to 'syllabification' - i.e. measu~ing not f~om st~essed vowel 
onset, but f~om st~essed syllable onset, so that initial consonants of 
st~essed syllables would be included in the following foot. 
2.2.3.2. Method 
A male native Welsh speake~ was ~eco~ded, unde~ the conditions 
described in section 2.1.2. above, read ing a list of simple Wel sh sentences. 
The reco~ding consisted of two sets of sentences. The fi~st set contained 
~andomly-o~de~ed sentences, while the second set contained most of these 
sentences, ar~anged so that simila~ sentences occu~ed in groups. Within 
each g~oup, each successive sentence was longe~ by the addition of one or 
two syllables. One such g~oup is the following: 
1) Mae'r got a~ fw~dd mewn ty 
/ma~r g,t a~ VtAl~~ m6&>n t~:/ 
The coat is on a table in a house 
2) Mae'~ got a~ y b~dd mewn ty 
/ma~r g~t ar a b~~~ mE'tOn t~:/ 
The coat is on the table in a house 
3) Mae'~ cotiau a~ y b~dd mewn ty 
/ma~~ k::>tja~ ar a bCJ~~ ms4Jn t~:/ 
The coats are on the table in a house 
4) Mae'~ cotiau ar y b~dd yn y ty 
/ma~~ k~tja~ a~ a b4)n; an 8 t4::/ 
The coats a~e on the table in the house 
5) Mae'~ cotiau a~ y by~ddiau yn y ty 
/ma4:~ k~tja4: a~a bgr~ja4: an ~ t4::/ 
The coats a~e on the tables in the house 
39 
Such an o~de~ing ~ep~esented an attempt to test both fo~ the 
consistency of the tendency towa~ds isoch~ony, measu~ed ove~ a diffe~ent 
set of sentences f~om befo~e, and al so to test fo~ any change in 
~hythmicality due to these simila~ sentences being g~ouped togethe~ in 
this way. The fi~st list contained these sentences in ~andom o~de~, as 
well as simila~ 'dist~acto~' sentences, and was p~esented fi~st, all in 
o~de~ to avoid suggesting to the subject that the sentences in the fi~st 
set had any ll'hythmic ~elationship. A native Welsh speake~ (not the 
~eco~ded subject) then listened to the tape and made st~ess jUdgements. 
The ~eco~dings we~e then measu~ed using the SEDIT sound editing p~og~am 
on a Compute~ Automation 'AI pha' LSI-2 /40 minicompute~ with a sampling 
~ate of 10 kHz afte~ analog low pass fH tedng at 5 kHz. The speech 
wavefo~m was displayed on a 26 x 34 cm display scope, and two manually-
cont~olled cu~so~s we~e used fo~ the dema~cation of points on the 
wavefo~m. A statistical analysis of the measu~ements was then pe~fo~med, 
using the Statistical Analysis System package on the Camb~idge Unive~sity 
IBM 3081 mainf~ame compute~. 
2.2.3.3. Results 
It was found that p~epausal and non-p~epausal feet we~e not compa~able, 
in that p~epausal feet gene~ally contained only one o~ two syllables, 
while non-p~epausal feet could contain up to six syllables. The numbe~ of 
p~epausal feet was insufficient fo~ any firm conclusions to be ~eached, 
but in gene~al it seemed that, given an equal numbe~ of syllables pe~ foot, 
the p~epausal foot tended to be longe~. This obse~vation, if ~eliable, 
would tally with simila~ obse~vations made fo~ p~epausal feet in English 
(see Lehiste 1977 fo~ a bdef summa~y of such wo~k). Because of this 
diffe~ence, in subsequent ~esults only the non-p~epausal feet a~e 
conside~ed, these being mo~e nume~ous and p~obably 'unma~ked' in thei~ 
du~ation. 
A second finding was that the two sets of sentences seemed 
significantly diffe~ent in ~hythmicality, as had been hypothesised; 
howeve~, the diffe~ence lay in the opposite di~ection f~om that expected, 
in that the fi~st set showed a g~eate~ tendency towa~ds isoch~ony fo~ both 
the syllabified and non-syllabified ve~sions. The ~elevant co~~elation 
40 
coefficient is that between syllable length and numbe~ of syllables pe~ 
foot; this is displayed below, whe~e 'non-syllabified' ~efe~s to 
measu~ements made f~om one st~essed vowel onset to the next, and 
'syllabified' ~efe~s to measu~ements made f~om one st~essed syllable onset 
to the next. 
Fo~ non-p~epausal feet only: p~oduct-moment co~~elation coefficients 
between syllable length and numbe~ of syllables pe~ foot 
Fbst set significance Second set significance 
non-syllabified -0.45 0.0001 -0.26 0.0072 
syllabified - 0.38 0.0001 -0.13 0.2038 
A possible explanation fo~ this ~esult may lie in the fact that the 
fi~st set was at the same time slightly mo~e 'syllable-timed', in that it 
showed a stronger correlation between foot length and number of syllables 
per foot in both the syllabified and non- syllabified versions, as 
displayed below. 
For non-prepausal feet only: product- moment correlation coefficients 
between foot length and number of syllables per foot 
First set significance Second set significance 
non-syllabified 0.83 0.0001 0.78 0.0001 
syllabified 0.82 0.0001 0.80 0.0001 
The reason for these stronger correlations in the first set could be 
simply that there was less variability in this set. This interpretation 
is supported by the fact that the significance of the coefficients for the 
second set in the first of the two tables above is much lower than the 
significance of the coefficients for the first set; the 'significance' of 
0.2038 for the syllabified version is in fact not statistically 
significant at all, and so this coefficient is most unreliable. The lower 
significances of the second set, and the fact that both its correlation 
coefficients are weaker, point to a greater variability in this set, and 
thus suggest that these particular findings (as regards the difference in 
variability between the sets) cannot be regarded as conclusive. It may be 
that the first set was produced more rhythmically than the second, but on 
the evidence presented above this cannot be said to have been proved 
satisfactorily, and the question remains open. 
41 
A third finding was that, in both sets, the non-syllabified version 
shoHed a greater tendency towards isochrony. This tendency was even 
greater in the prepausal feet, but this could probably be explained by the 
different possible numbers of syllables per foot in non-prepausal and 
prepausal feet - no prepausal foot contained more than two syllables, so 
isochrony would be more likely to be found in such a context. For non-
prepausal feet, the correlation coefficients are as follows: 
For non-prepausal feet only: product-moment correlation coefficients 
correlation foot leng th: no. of syllable length: no. of 
between syllables per foot syllables per foot 
FIRST SET 
non-syllabified 0.8283 -0.4546 
significance 0.0001 0.0001 
syllabified 0.8152 -0.3789 
significance 0.0001 0.0001 
SECOND SET 
non-syllabified 0.7814 -0.2644 
significance 0.0001 0.0072 
syllabified 0.7975 (-0.1302) 
significance 0.0001 (0.2038 ) 
It is clear that the non-syllabified versions of measurements show a 
much greater tendency towards isochronyl stress timing (from the 
correlation between syllable length and number of syllables per foot), 
while there is very little difference between the two types of measurement 
in the case of the tendency towards syllable timing (the correlation 
between foot length and number of syllables per foot). The high 
significances of nearly all the correlation coefficients lend support to 
this conclusion. 
The preceding table also demonstrates that the tendency towards 
isochrony found in the previous experiment was also found in this set of 
measurements, thus lending confidence that the previous finding was 
significant. The tendency is not as strong as that found in speech 
produced outside experimental cond itions (section 2.2.2.) but is 
nevertheless clearly there, most reliably in the first set. The 
coefficient of determination (calculated by squaring the correlation 
coefficient and multiplying by 100) gives a measure of how much of the 
variability in one factor can be explained by the variability in the other 
42 
factor, and can be used to compare the two sets of measurements, as seen 
below (where r=correlation coefficient, cd=coefficient of determination, 
and all feet are non-prepausal): 
Rehearsed speech (first set only) 
Unrehearsed sEeech non-syllabified syllabified 
no. of syllables no. of syllables no. of syllables 
per foot per foot per foot 
r cd r cd r cd 
foot length 0.85 72% 0.83 69% 0.82 67% 
syllable leng th -0.55 30% -0.45 20% -0.38 14% 
The meaning of these figures is, for example, that in the non-
syllabified version of the measurements of rehearsed speech, 20% of the 
variation in syllable length could be explained by the variation in the 
number of syllables per foot. 
2.2.3.4. Discussion 
Since prepausal and non-prepausal feet were found not to be comparable, 
the following remarks apply only to non-prepausal feet, the most numerous 
type. A tendency towards isochrony was observed in this experiment, thus 
encouraging the view that this tendency is a real phenomenon and not 
merely a feature of the first set of this series of measurements. 
Although the tendency is slightly weaker in the second experiment, it is 
nevertheless present, especially in the first set of sentences recorded. 
The null hypothesis that there was no difference in rhythmicality 
between the two sets of sentences could not be conclusively proved false, 
because of the probable different degree of variability in each set. Thus 
this aspect of the experiment was inconclusive. 
Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of this experiment is the finding 
that the non-syllabified versions of measurements showed a greater 
tendency towards isochrony. This could mean that, for purposes of rhythm, 
each consonant 'belong s' to the preced ing rather than to the following 
vowel. Such a conclusion is supported by two observations: 
a) A consonant after a stressed vowel is lengthened, as described in 
section 2.2.4.1. and investigated in section 2.3.1. 
El Phonological vowel length in Welsh is determined by the nature 
and number of the following consonant(s) - see Rhys Jones (1977:21-
43 
22) for a summary of vowel length rules. 
For rhythmic and phonetic purposes, therefore, it seems that feet must 
be counted as startin,g at the onset of the stressed vowel. This finding 
seems to contradict two of R. Jones' rules of syllabification (in a recent 
auditory study of three Welsh dialects), viz.: 
'(1) Onset zero marginal occurs initially only in the working 
unit. Final zero marginal can occur in any position. 
(2) Statistical evidence favours a C element as the onset marginal 
of a syllable rather than as the final marg inal of a preced ing 
syllable.' (Jones, R.O. 1967:250) 
Jones' syllabification rules for Welsh are based on the statistical 
approach advocated by O'Connor and Trim (1953) for English, and give 
comparable results to Selkirk's 'Ma x imal Syllable Onset Principle' for 
English, whereby a consonant is assigned to the following vowel if at all 
possible (Selkirk 1980b: 9) . It could be that on another level of 
linguistic analysis the rules of syllabification take a different form, so 
that for purposes of morphological alternation, and especially for the 
Welsh system of word-initial consonantal mutations, syllables could be 
seen as beginning with a consonant wherever possible. However, this is as 
yet merely speculation . What does seem to be clear is that stress in 
Welsh, and taking vowel onset as the start of the syllable, are linked by 
the factor of isochrony; and it could be said that this type of syllable-
division is more closely linked to rhythm than is the more conventional 
type of syllable- division. 
2.2.4 Segmental measurements 
2.2.4.1. Consonants 
A list of thirty-two isolated regularly- stressed Welsh disyllables 
with medial voiceless stop was read by the Welsh speaker of section 2.2.3., 
and was recorded. Measurements of the consonants were made from the tape 
using the SEDIT program (see section 2.2.3.2. ) and a statistical anal ysis 
was conducted. 
44 
The main result was that the post- stress consonant was significantly 
longer than the consonant after the unstressed (final) syllable. The mean 
length of the post- stress consonant was 167 ms, that of the final 
consonant was 109 ms,' a difference of 58 ms at a significance level of 
p(0.01. The post- stress consonant had far lower variabil ity; it tended 
not to deviate very much from its mean, unlike the final consonant. This 
could be explained by the following observation. 
The proportion of the word taken up by the post- stress consonant tended 
to decrease as the overall word length increased (correlation of consonant 
as percentage of word, and word length = - 0.82, significance level 
p(0.0001) . Thus the post- stress consonant was tending towards a constant 
absolute length. On the other hand, the proportion of the word taken up by 
the final consonant tended to increase as the word length increased 
(correlation of consonant as percentage of word, and word length = 0.80, 
significance level p(0.0001). Thus the final consonant tended to take up 
a dispropor tionate amount of the increase in word length, leaving the 
medial, post- stress consonant relatively unchanged. This finding fits 
observations made by workers cited by Lehiste (1977). 
Perceptual evidence cited by Lehiste (op. cit.) suggests that a human 
listener 'expects' final segments to be longer and normalises accordingly. 
Thus it may be that the over- long final consonant in longer words would 
not be perceived as very long, and so the medial consonant would have more 
perceptual length than the physical facts would seem to warrant. In words 
uttered at normal conversational speed, however, the post- stress consonant 
is longer than the post- unstress consonant; a finding that agrees with 
the 'extra duration' observed auditorily for post- stress voiceless stops 
in certain contex ts (J ones, R. O. 1967). 
2.2.4. 2. Vowels 
Measurements were also made of the vowels in the unrehearsed speech 
data. These were classified along three dimensions: prepausal versus 
non- prepausal, stressed versus unstressed, and phonologically long versus 
phonologically short. A statistical analysis was then carried out, and 
the following findings were made. 
45 
Prepausal vowels were found to be significantly longer than non-
prepausal vowels (p<O.01), with mean lengths of 126 ms and 77 ms 
respectively. Because of this difference, and since long vowels may only 
occur in stressed syliables in Welsh, the effect of stress on vowel length 
was considered in relation to short non-prepausal vowels only. Stressed 
vowels were found to be significantly shorter than unstressed vowels 
(p<O.05), with mean lengths of 59 ms and 73 ms respectively. This finding 
bears out in a more rigorous way the finding concerning duration of the 
stressed vowel, in sections 2.1.3. and 2.2.1.3. Because of the restriction 
on the distribution of long vowels, the effect of phonological length on 
vowel duration was considered in relation to stressed vowels only. No 
significant difference could be demonstrated here; however, the number of 
observations in each category was far lower than in the case of the other 
comparisons, and thus any difference in length would have been more 
d ifficul t to prove statistically - the mean durations ind icated that 
phonologically long vowels have a longer phonetic duration. Thus this 
particular comparison must be regarded as inconclusive. 
The interesting finding in this set of measurements is that the 
stressed vowel of the penult is consistentl y shorter (note: stressed 
monosyllables are not being considered). The lengthening of prepausal 
segments has been observed in other languages (see Lehiste 1977 for a 
summary), and these findings merely confirm the fact for Welsh. It is also 
to be expected that phonologically long vowels would be longer in duration 
than phonologically short vowels; though this could not be demonstrated 
conclusively in the above measurements, the tendency seems to be in this 
direction. The conclusion from all segmental measurements is that stress 
in penults is linked with a shortening of the stressed vowel and a 
leng thening of the following consonant; this is not at all what would 
have been predicted from the evidence of stress in other languages. 
46 
I 
I 
2.3 Perceptual experiments 
2.3.1 Post-stress consonant 
2.3.1.1. Aim 
In a prev ious set of measurements (section 2.2.4.1.), the duration of a 
consonant after a stressed vowel had been found to be significantly longer 
than the duration of a consonant after an unstressed vowel. It was 
decided to test this discovery about speech production in an experiment 
concerned with speech perception, in order to find out whether the 
perceptual facts paralleled those of production. 
2.3.1.2. Method 
Editing This experiment made use of perhaps the only convincing 
minimal pair in Welsh differentiated solely by stress: namely, ymladd, 
l';mla~1 'to fight', and ymladd ' h ml8':~1 'to tire oneself out'. These words 
were among a list recorded by a (female) native Welsh speaker, in the same 
conditions as in section 2.1.2. 
The SEDIT sound editing program (see section 2.2.3.2.) was then used to 
isolate one sample of each of the two words in question, and to make 
modifications in the length of the Iml segment. For each source word, the 
leng th of this segment was first increased to 255 ms by red uplication of a 
fe w cycles of the nasal portion of the waveform, and then red uced to 13 ms 
in steps of 15 or 16 ms at first (i.e . four cycles) and then in steps of 11 
or 12 ms (i.e. three cycles) as the nasal became shorter. The original 
word was then added in each case, making a total of forty stimuli, each 
half of this list originating from one of the two source words. The 
editing-down of the sound wave was done in integral numbers of cycles, as 
otherwise an audible 'click' spoil t the effect; this is the reason for the 
slight fluctuation in length of each of the two types of step described 
above. 
The stimUli were then processed using a Computer Automation 'AI pha' 
LSI-2/40 minicomputer to drive a CED 301 digital speech synthesiser 
47 
~~ ____ ----------------_J 
programmed to implement a linear prediction coding model of speech 
synthesis. The first step of the processing was to reduce the speech data 
to linear prediction coefficients. This was accomplished by using a 
specialised program already supplied. The program had the drawback, 
however, of beginning its reducing to LPC coefficients a little earlier 
than the point specified by the operator, while also ending its processing 
a little later than the point specified; the extent of each discrepancy 
was not known exactly. The (somewhat crude) solution to this problem was 
to precede and follow each stimulus with approx. 200 ms of low-amplitude 
machine noise, with the result that a little of this random noise was 
incl uded with the stimulus (both before and after each vowel) in the 
linear prediction coefficients. The random noise had, however, been 
unaccountably amplified by the program, so that the auditory result was 
similar to a word spoken at moderate loudness on a bad telephone line. 
Re-synthesis The next step in processing was to play the stimuli 
through the speech synthesiser linked to the minicomputer. This was 
accomplished using a linear prediction coding program already supplied. 
However, a modification was made to this program so that the speech output 
was reduced to a constant monotone on all voiced segments. The monotone 
frequency chosen in this case was 280 Hz. Words spoken on a high Fo are 
somewhat easier to hear than speech at a low Fo, in conditions of low 
signal-to-noise ratio. Thus a fairly high Fo was chosen, to improve the 
audibility of the stimuli above the ineradicable background hiss 
mentioned above. 
The purpose of reducing the Fo of the stimuli to a monotone was to 
factor out all pitch cues to stress perception, so that the experiment 
would focus only on cues of segmental duration, if any. It was not 
possible to control the intensity of the stimuli. This had probably been 
through several transformations in the stages of processing, and it was 
not immediately obvious how to set about controlling for intensity. The 
intensity of the stimulus words was probably only indirectly related to 
the intensity of the source words. However, the measurements described in 
sections 2. 1. and 2.2.1. had ind icated that mean and peak amplitude, and the 
integral of the amplitude, were most unreliable for the purposes of stress 
identification, and so it was assumed that intensity would not be a 
48 
significant factor in stress jUdgements. Fig. 4 presents a portion of the 
waveform of the nasal both before and after processing by the synthesiser. 
It will be noted that although the higher frequencies have been lost and 
the amplitude reduced', the waveform is a passable one for a nasaL 
Similarly, Fig. 5 presents a portion of the waveform of the /a/ in ymladd 
before and after synthesis; it will be noted that no great distortion has 
been introduced. 
Experimental tape The synthesised monotone stimuli were recorded on an 
open- reel tape recorder (Ferrograph series seven Mark 2) as they were 
played out, and were then re-recorded, in random order, on an Ampex AG 440 
open-reel tape recorder. The pattern of re - recording was as follows. The 
list of stimuli was introduced by a few sentences in Welsh describing the 
nature of the task, but without any 'cue word' or spoken example. Each 
stimulus was preceded by its number, spoken in Welsh. After the number 
there was a short pause, and then the first instance of the stimulus, after 
which about two or three seconds' silence were left on the tape before the 
second instance of the same stimulus. After this was another three 
seconds (approx.) of silence before the number of the next stimulus. The 
silent gaps were to allow the Welsh listeners time to make judgements and 
note them down . After the list of forty words had been re - recorded i n 
this way, the phrase 'please turn over' was spoken in Welsh, and the next 
list began (see section 2.3.2.). This list was the first of four similar 
lists of stimuli. 
To accompany the experimental tape, response sheets were prepared for 
each listener. These included the explanatory Welsh words, typed at the 
top of the page, with an example. The two alternatives, ymladd and ymladd, 
headed a col umn each with a paraphrase in Wel sh beneath each word, and 
space was left by each stimulus number for a tick to be made beside the 
word identified by the listener with the stimulus. The experimental tape 
was then copied onto a chromium dioxide TDK SA60 cassette tape, and this 
cassette tape was the one used in the experiment . A group of ten female 
native Welsh speakers, all students at the Normal (i.e. teacher - training) 
College at Bangor, in the north of Wales, then listened simultaneously to 
the tape using headphones in the Language Learning Laboratory of the 
Normal College, and marked their judgements on the response sheets, hav ing 
49 
J 
Clmp 1 :l tucle FIG. 4Cl: 
2121 121 121- - --
:lJ21i2Ji21-
-- :l 121 121 121-
I 
-- 2 0 0 121-r:----
o 
/ m / 0 F / d m 1 a'~ 8 / F ,~ 0 m o,~ i 9 i n Cl 1 ,~ e C o,~ cl i n 9 
-------- ------------ - --------------- ------ -------1 
-c------ ----=r=--
2 12J-0 3ltYLl 
~~----
t:lrne: 51" 2 rns 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
_--,--1 500 
Cl m p 1 :i I::. LJ cl e F IG " Ll b :: / I)) / 0 f le; m 1 cl ~ ~ / Cl f I::. e r ,~ e s y ,-d:. he 8 :i s 
21210121-1----------- - -----
-- 1 121 1210-1 
I 
-- - --- .-------.~-------.-----.------- .. ---. ----- ------ ._- - - ----- -----_ . . - - -
50 
! 
I 
I 
I 
..-I~ 
i 
time: 51 .. 2 1))8 
Clmp 1 :l tude F I C .. 
2000-1 
I 
-I 
1000-
- j 
I 
0-
.- 1 000 
/ 
5 Cl : I Cl ~ I 0 F I Cl m 1 Cl : ~ I - 0 I~ :l 9 .i n Cl 1 re C 0 I~ din 9 
._------------------------_ . . . ------- ------ - ------ - - .. ----------
I 
I 
~ 
j 
I 
I 
I 
7.S- ----~lek2J-----12.5' 
l-., i me ~ 12 .. 8 ms 
Clmp 1 :i tude / , FIG. 5b: 13: I of I() m 13: {) I a F ·l:.e l~ I~ esyn l-., hes.i s 
2 0 0 0 - - ---
1000-
0-
·-2000- 0 ----- ---~:S---·--
--·---- ------ --- ---- ---- ·----------·-·--·1 
70S 
51 
100---- lc:::..5 
I:.:l me: 12 .. 8 ms 
I 
• 
i 
been asked to identify the stimulus they heard as one of the two 
possibilities. A statistical analysis of the stress judgements was then 
carried out, using the Statistical Analysis System package on the 
Cambridge Uni versi ty IBM 3081 mainframe computer. 
Variables and indices The length of the nasal was calculated as a 
percentage of the length of the word and formed one variable. other 
variables were: source word (with two possible original words) and the 
number of subjects who judged each stimulus to be ymladd - since this was 
a forced-choice situation, it follows that the number judging the stimulus 
to be ymladd would be the remainder out of ten. 
The responses of each subject were then checked to test for marked 
deviation from the other subjects' jUdgements. Any case of consistent 
disagreement would have led to the subject(s) in question being discounted 
in the final statistical analysis. To this end, the lists' 'majority sites' 
were identified; these were stimuli which at least 50% of the subjects 
had judged to be ymladd. For each subject, three indices were then 
calculated, as follows: 
a) The first index was gained by dividing the number of stimuli marked by 
the subject that turned out to be majority sites, by the number of 
ymladd judgements made by the subject. A low figure would indicate 
that many of the subject's ymladd judgements were non-majority sites: 
in other words, that she tended not to agree with the others. This 
index gave no information as to whether the subject managed to locate 
many of the total number of possible majority sites. 
b) The second index was gained by divid ing the number of stimuli marked by 
the subject that turned out to be majority sites, by the number of 
majority sites contained in the list as a whole. A low figure would 
indicate that the subject did not locate many of the possible majority 
sites: in other words, that where she did agree with the others, this 
could not be to any large extent. This index gave no information as to 
whether many of the subject's ymladd judgements were not majority 
sites. 
52 
c) The third index was gained by dividing the number of ymladd judgements 
made by the subject, by the number of stimuli in the list that were 
judged ymladd by at least one subject. A low figure would ind icate 
that the subject did not hear many items as ymladd at all: in other 
words, that she tended to hear ymladd (stress on penult) whatever the 
original word. This index gave no information as to what proportion of 
the subject's ymladd judgements turned out to be majority sites. 
Fig. 6 shows the resulting indices by subject. The calculations were 
taken over all four lists of stimuli (see sections 2.3.2. and 2.3.3. for 
details of the other three lists). It will be noted that there is no great 
deviation between subjects in mean values over all indices. Because of 
this reasonable degree of consistenc~ the judgements of all the subjects 
were included in the statistical anal ysis. The mean val ue of the third 
index is very slightly above 0.5, which might seem to suggest that, over 
all the lists taken together, the subjects tended to make slightly more 
ymladd judgements; however, this figure was due to the influence of list 
3, as will be seen later (section 2.3.3.). The mean value of the first 
index is high, which suggests that subj ects tended to agree amongst 
themselves in their ymladd jUdgements. The mean value of the second index 
is also high, which suggests that individual subjects tended to locate 
most of the majority sites. 
2.3.1.3. Results 
Nasal length effect It was found that the length of the post-stress 
nasal had a significant influence on stress judgements, as had been 
suggested by the preliminary measurements described in section 2.2.4.1. 
The (product-moment) correlation coefficient between the length of the 
nasal (as a percentage of the word leng th) and the number of ymladd 
judgements made, was -0.54, at a significance level of p(0.0004. This means 
that the greater the proportion of the word taken up by the nasal, the more 
likel y the word was to be judged as ymladd (stress on the penult): in 
other words, listeners expect the consonant to be longer when it follows a 
stressed vowel. 
53 
Fig. 6: indices by subject 
index subject no.:-
1 2 ' 3 4 5 6 
a 0.85 0.84 0.79 0.79 0.87 0.81 
b 0.73 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.68 
c 0.51 0.55 0.61 0.59 0.54 0.51 
mean 0.79 0.81 0.79 0.78 0.83 0.74 a+b 
7 8 9 10 means 
a 0.72 0.88 0.72 0. 85 0.81 
b 0.74 0.81 0.70 0.82 0.76 
c 0.61 0.57 0.58 0.58 0.57 
mean 0.73 0.85 0.71 0.84 0.79 a+b 
Fig. 9: indices by list no. 
index list no.:-
1 2 3 4 means 
a 0.4359 0.5714 0.6944 0.7097 0.6029 
b 0.4250 0.5714 0.6250 0.5500 0.5429 
c 0.9750 1 .0000 0.9000 0.7750 0.9125 
mean 0.4305 0.5714 0.6597 0.6299 0.5729 a+b 
see text for description of indices and their calculation: 
Fig. 6 - section 2.3.1.2., under 'Variables and indices' 
Fig. 9 - section 2.3.3.3., under 'Calculating indices' 
54 
Source word effect Simul taneousl y with the nasal leng th effect there 
was also a significant source word effect, whereby the original forms of 
the stimulus words influenced listeners' stress jUdgements. This was 
found by calculating ' the (product-moment) correlation coefficient of 
source word number and number of ymladd jUdgements. The coefficient was 
0.7136, at a significance level of p(0.0001, ind icating a moderate source 
word effect on stress judgements. A possible cause of this source word 
effect will be discussed in section 2.3.3.3. 
2.3.1.4. Discussion 
This experiment provided support for the notion that stress in Welsh is 
accompanied by an increase in the length of the following consonant. The 
experiment supported in perceptual terms what had previously been 
discovered only from the speech production point of view. It also brought 
out a prev iousl y unsuspected source word effect which, however, was not 
strong enough to obliterate the nasal length effect. 
2.3.2 Phonological segmental length 
2.3.2.1. Aim 
The second perceptual experiment was of a different kind, being 
concerned not with stress but with phonological consonantal length. The 
aim was to discover whether or not the duration of the nasal plays any 
part in differentiating between the two words tonau Itoma~1 'tunes' and 
tonnau It~n:a~1 'waves'. The first word is traditionally regarded as 
having long 101 and short 1nl, while the opposite is the case for the 
second word. The experiment was designed to test for any objective basis 
for the distinction between long (or 'geminate') and short 1nl in these two 
words. 
2.3.2.2. Method 
The procedure was much the same as for the first perceptual experiment 
(see section 2.3.1.2.). The two words were recorded by the same speaker and 
under the same conditions as before. They were then edited by the SEDIT 
program so that the duration of the first vowel of each word was 120 ms -
an intermediate stage between the original I:JI of 95 ms and 10:1 of 139 ms. 
55 
The leng th of the nasal in each word was increased to 250 ms and then 
reduced to 14 ms in steps of 13 or 14 ms at first (i.e. 3 cycles) and then 
in steps of 9 or 10 ms (i.e. 2 cycles) as the nasal became shorter. The 
completed stimuli were then reduced to linear prediction coefficients, 
adding a stretch of machine noise before and after each word, as before. 
The stimuli were output on the speech synthesiser at a monotone of 280 Hz, 
and were recorded on open-reel tape. They were then re-recorded in a 
different random order from the first list, using introductory sentences 
and numbers, and pauses between each item, as in the first experiment of 
this kind. Response sheets of the same format as before were prepared, and 
the ten listeners were asked to identify the stimulus they heard as one of 
the two possibilities. During the running of the experiment, there was a 
minute or so of pause between each of the lists on the experimental tape, 
during which the ten listeners conversed with one another in Welsh. 
A statistical analysis of the judgements was carried out as before. 
The length of the nasal was calculated as a percentage of the length of 
the word, and formed one variable. Other variables were: source word (two 
possibilities), and the number of subjects who judged each stimulus to be 
tonau (with short 1nl); since this was a forced-choice situation, it 
follows that the number judging the stimulus to be tonnau (with long In:/) 
would be the remainder out of ten. 
2.3.2.3. Results 
There was no nasal length effect found at all; the duration of the 
nasal as a percentage of word length had no correlation with the number of 
tonau jUdgements. This is in sharp contrast to the findings of the first 
perceptual experiment, where a clear and significant nasal length effect 
was discovered. 
There was a strong source word effect; the source word from which a 
stimulus originated had a strong influence on the number of tonau 
jUdgements. The correlation coefficient for these two variables was 
0.7608, at a significance level of p<0.0001, indicating that this was a 
reliable and significant finding. 
56 
2.3.2.4. Discussion 
The only factor operating in this second list of stimuli was the source 
word effect. Clearly,. phonological segmental length has no basis in 
phonetic facts in the case of the nasal in these two words. The cause of 
the source word effect in this case is probably the different quality of 
the two '0' vowels. Spectra were made of the unprocessed forms of the two 
vowels in question, using an already-provided program on the minicomputer. 
Fig. 7 gives a comparison of these two spectra; it can be seen that they 
differ in formant structure and are thus probably perceptually distinct. 
Such a finding agrees with the present-day situation in the Welsh 
language, where the old distinction between single -n- and geminate -nn-
is dying out. It is never used in colloquial speech, and not always used 
in careful speech, the quality of the vowel taking over the whole burden of 
differentiation in such cases. Thus the results of this experiment 
provide objective support for this auditorily-observed tendency in modern 
Welsh. Although the results may seem disappointing, in reality they are 
of great interest, since they indicate that, even given the whole range of 
nasal length, the vowel quality alone is sufficient to condition 
judgements. This strength of the vowel quality cue gives a plausible 
reason why the nasal length cue is dying out in this word-pair - it is 
simply not needed, as listeners can differentiate sufficiently from vowel 
quality cues. In any language, what is not needed is soon lost, and Welsh 
seems to be no exception. 
In order to investigate whether vowel qual ity were al so the cause of 
the source word effect in the first word-pair, spectra were made of the 
unprocessed forms of the second vowel of ymladd and ymladd. Fig. 8 shows a 
comparison of these spectra, and it is clear that there is little, if any, 
discrepancy between them. To all intents and purposes. they are the same 
vowel, al though articulatorily there is supposedly a difference in 
closeness - short lal being [a·] and long lal being [aT] (Jones, R.O.:279). 
However, any articulatory difference there may be is obviously 
insufficient to give rise to an acoustic difference, and so it can be 
assumed that there was no auditory difference between the two vowels in 
this experiment. Therefore some other cause of the source word effect 
would have to be found (see section 2.3.3.3.). 
57 
i n l:. G /l S d:. y ( c1 lD FIG _ 7 Cl ~ S p e cl:.r u m of /0/ i n / -l:. 0: n 6 / 
5~l 
421~ 
I 
321-
221-
10-
2)- ------·-T 
o 10~21 
(from original recording) 
T-----·"] 
20~0 30~0 40~0 
o - 5 kHz 
illl:. e nsi·tv (dB) FIG 'lb S l:. c / / /L . f ." ~ pec '- ,~ uf)) or :) in "C.? n: £ / 5.LJ--.--~---=====:...---·--- ---
40 
(f,~ om O l~ i 9 :i. nCll I~ ecord i "g ) 
::30-
20-
l 
I 
I 
I 
i 
-I 
I 
0-1-
0
---
1
-
0
00- 3!2]--rg-Q]----4-!2]-rg 0--.) --~0 
o - 5 k Hz 
i n-cens i '1::.'1 F '[ G 8 S' (' / / / 1 / X / 
, ' . 0: peCT:.rum or 8: in Cl m El: 0 
50~-~----~========~---~----~------~--~----~------------~ 
40 
(from original recording) 
30-
20-
0-~0-------1-0~0-------2-21~0-------3-00~0---------4-0-0~0----~0 
o - 5 kHz 
',L' ,,,,Lens 1 -1::.'1 (dB)' F '[ G Bb S I. F / / // 'l '1'/ 
' 'C -,.. ~ ' p e C 'C '''' u rn 0 ' - ' Cl i n a m ~ , Cl (/ 
50 
40-
30 
20 
59 
( f r~ 0 rn 0 '''' i gin 0 1 , ~ e co,'" din 9 ) 
421 0 
o - 5 kHz 
50 21 
2.3-3 Effect of pitch-prominence 
2.3.3.1. Aim 
Hav ing establ ished a post - stress consonant leng th cue to stress in 
words presented on a monotone, the next step was to test for any variation 
in this cue due to the pitch-prominence of one or the other of the two 
syllables. Pitch-prominence was seen as either higher pitch on a 
syllable, or a pitch glide. This was in accordance with Crystal's 
definition for English, where any deviation from the 'norm' (which is a 
slight step downwards in pitch) constitutes pitch-prominence (Crystal 
1969) • 
2.3.3.2. Method 
Third list The minimal pair ymladd/ ymladd was again used, being edited 
and reduced to linear prediction coefficients as described in section 
2.3.1.2. Upon re-synthesis, however, no monotone was used. Instead, an Fo 
pattern was superimposed on the synthesiser output using a digitiser pad 
(Summagraphics 'Bitpad one') linked to the synthesiser via the 
minicomputer. A manually-operated 'pen' linked to the digitiser tablet 
was used to superimpose an Fo pattern on the speech as it was played out by 
the synthesiser, this output being simultaneously recorded on open- reel 
tape . The digitiser also had the effect of slowing down the speech 
slightly; however, as the nasal length was calculated in percentage 
rather than absolute terms, this did not affect the method of analysis. 
Two types of Fo pattern were superimposed on the speech output. In the 
first pattern, the superimposed curve was a downgl ide during the first 
syllable and a steady lower pitch during the second syllable. Since the 
source words had different original pitch patterns, the result differed 
according to source word, as follows: 
pitch patterns of: original ymladd original ymladd 
-
superimposed pattern resul ting ymladd resul ting ymladd 
, ----
-----
60 
The two pitch patterns resulting from this process had in common the 
fact that the second syllable did not begin at a higher pitch than the 
first. It was possible to distinguish auditorily between the two 
patterns, but only when they were listened to closely by someone familiar 
with the tracking of intonation patterns. The stimuli from source word 
ymladd began the first syllable at approx. 315 Hz and kept this fairly 
constant, while the second syllable began at approx. 310 Hz and stayed 
level. The stimuli from source word ymladd began the first syllable at 
approx. 280 Hz and kept this fairly constant, while the second syllable 
began at approx. 315 Hz and fell to approx. 250 Hz - the only pitch change 
that could be perceived. The first syllable in each case was too short to 
carry a change in Fo. The perceptual effect, on careful listening, was as 
in the diagrams above. 
The list of stimuli was re-recorded in a different random order from 
the first two lists, in the same format as before. It was presented to the 
listeners as described earlier (section 2.3.1.2.), with a short break after 
the preced ing list. A statistical anal ysis was then carried out as 
before. 
Fourth list The same procedure was carried out again with a different 
superimposed pitch pattern. This second pattern consisted of a level 
first syllable and a falling ultima. 
according to source word, as follows: 
The result differed slightl y 
pitch patterns of: original ymladd 
superimposed pattern resul ting ymladd 
- ------ ------
original ymladd 
----resul ting ymladd 
-~ 
The two pitch patterns resulting from this process had in common the 
fact that the ultima began at a higher pitch than the penult, and then fell 
in pitch. Again, it was possible to distinguish auditorily between the 
two patterns, but only on careful listening. The stimuli from source word 
ymladd began the penult at approx. 305 Hz, while the ultima began at 
approx. 330 Hz and fell to approx. 300 Hz. The stimuli from source word 
ymladd began the first syllable at approx . 300 Hz, while the ultima began 
at approx. 350 Hz and fell to approx. 270 Hz. The penult in each case was 
61 
too short to carry a change in Fo. The perceptual effect, on careful 
listening, was as in the diagrams above. The list of stimuli was re-
recorded and presented as described earlier, and a statistical analysis 
was carried out. 
2. 3. 3. 3. Re su 1 ts 
Calculating indices For each of the four lists, indices were calculated 
based on listeners' jUdgements. The indices were of two kinds: a) to 
indicate the degree of agreement between listeners (and thus, indirectly, 
the difficulty of the task), and b) to indicate the accuracy with which the 
listeners pinpointed the source word of each stimulus (thus giving a 
measure of any source word effect there might be). The first group of 
indices (see Fig. 9 on page 54) were three in number, as follows: 
a) The first index was gained by dividing the number of majority sites in 
the list by the number of stimuli in the list that had been judged as 
ymladd by at least one listener. A low figure would ind icate that 
many ymladd judgements were made on non-majority sites: in other 
words, that there was a wide degree of 'scatter' of the judgements, and 
not much agreement. This index gave no information as to whether 
there were many majori ty sites in the list. 
b) The second index was gained by dividing the number of majority sites 
in the list by the number of stimuli in the list. A low figure would 
indicate that not many stimuli were majority sites: in other words, 
that there was little agreement among subjects. This index gave no 
information as to whether there was much 'scatter' of judgements, or as 
to the total number of ymladd judgements made. 
c) The third index was gained by dividing the number of stimuli in the 
list judged as ymladd by at least one subj ect, by the number of stimuli 
in the list. A low figure would indicate that only a small proportion 
of the stimuli were capable of being judged as ymladd~ in other words, 
that there could be an unknown biasSing factor. A high figure would 
indicate that a high proportion of the stimuli were capable of being 
judged as ymladd - this turned out to be the case, and thus showed the 
need to use the 'majority site' system instead of working with absolute 
numbers of ymladd judgements, since only thus could consistencies in 
the judgements be followed. This index gave no information as to the 
degree of consistency of judgements, but merel y establ ished the 
validity of using the 'majority site' system. 
The second type of index could be termed an 'accuracy index', and was 
obtained by dividing the number of stimUli that were correctly judged 
ymladd or tonau by each subject, by the total number of ymladd or tonau 
62 
judgements made by the subject. A low figure would indicate that the 
subject was not successfully locating the stimuli originating from ymladd 
or tonau: in other words, that she was not being influenced by the source 
word. This index gave no information either as to whether the subj ects 
agreed consistently with one another in their source word location, or as 
to whether each subject made many ymladd or tonau judgements at all. Fig. 
10 shows these indices broken down by subject and list number. 
Results of indices From Fig. 9 it can be seen that the first list showed 
the lowest degree of agreement among subjects, while the third list showed 
the highest degree. The high val ues for the third index ind icated the 
need to use the 'majority site' system to track down any consistencies in 
judgements. The degree of agreement between subjects will later be seen 
to be important in considering the source word effect. 
From Fig. 10 it can be seen that the subjects differed in their 
susceptibility to the source word effect, but there was no outstanding 
dev iation, so no subj ect was discounted. More importantl y, the source word 
effect was seen to differ between the lists, such that it was strongest in 
the fourth list and weakest in the third list. This \-lill later be useful 
information in considering the cause of the source word effect. 
Nasal length effect The length of the medial nasal had a significant 
influence on stress judgements in both the third and the fourth lists. In 
the third list the (product- moment) correlation coefficient between the 
nasal length as a percentage of word length, and the number of ymladd 
judgements made, was - 0.57 at a significance level of p<0.0002. In the 
fourth list, the correlation coefficient was - 0.37 at a Significance level 
of p<0.0208. It will be seen that the correlation in list 4 is weaker and 
slightly less reliable; however, it is still statistically Significant, 
and a real effect . 
Source word effect A moderate source word effect was found for list 3 
(though it was at its lowest for this list), as can be seen from the mean 
'accuracy index' in Fig. 10 of 0.68. For this list, also, the correlation 
between source word and number of ymladd judgements was 0.65 (p<0.0001). 
A much greater source word effect was found for list 4, as can be seen from 
63 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
( 
r ( 
Fig. 10: 'accuracy indices' by subject and list no. 
list no. subject no.:-
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 0.78 0.82 0.65 0.70 0.87 0.77 
2 0.53 0.95 0.67 0.81 0.50 0.67 
3 0.79 0.57 0.81 0.62 0.70 0.50 
4 0.94 0.95 0.95 0.76 0.82 0.67 
means of 0.84 0.78 0.80 0.69 0.80 0.65 1 ,3, and 4 
7 8 9 10 means 
1 0.57 0.65 0.60 0.94 0.74 
2 0.43 0.93 0.93 0.48 0.69 
3 0.67 0.77 0.50 0.83 0.68 
4 0.73 0.83 0.63 0.82 0.81 
means of 0.66 0.75 0.58 0.86 0.74 1 ,3, and 4 
see text for description of indices and their calculation: 
Fig. 10 - section 2.3.3.3., under 'Calculating indices' 
64 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
the mean 'accuracy index' in Fig. 10 of 0.81. For this list, also, the 
correlation between source word and number of ymladd judgements was 0.85 
(p(0.0001). Clearly there is a source word effect for both lists, though 
far more so in the fourth list. 
The cause of this source word effect cannot be differing formant 
structure of the vowels (see section 2.3.2.4.). The most obvious 
explanation, at first sight, would seem to be the perceptibly different 
pitch patterns of the stimuli according to each word. However, this is not 
such a satisfactory explanation as it may seem. From the indices in Fig. 9 
it has been concluded that: a) the third list showed the highest degree 
of agreement among subjects but the weakest source word effect - in other 
words, the listeners were consistent in marking the 'wrong' thing; and 
that b) the fourth I ist showed a moderate degree of agreement among 
subj ects and the strongest source word effect - in other word s, the 
listeners were marking the 'right' thing, but less consistently. Such a 
pattern points to the existence of at least one other factor that is 
'interfering' with the source word effect and preventing it from becoming 
the main factor. 
Another argument against the 'pitch pattern' explanation of the source 
word effect would be the fact that lists 3 and 4 are so different in their 
results. If the pitch patterns were perceptually distinct to an identical 
degree, it would have been expected that the source word effect would also 
be present to an identical degree in the two lists. In fact, the 
judgements show a wholly different pattern, as regards both consistency 
and accuracy, while the pitch patterns do not show any marked degree of 
difference according to source word; for each list, the resulting Fo 
curves have major points in common, chiefly concerned with whether or not 
the ultima begins at a higher Fo than the penult, and whether the general 
pattern of the ultima is a low or a high fall/step-down (to use British 
school terms of intonational analysis). Moreover, the source word effect 
was also found in list 1, where there was no Fo movement at all. Thus the 
differing pitch patterns cannot be said to have given rise to the source 
word effect. 
65 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
An alternative explanation for the source word effect is provided by 
features of segmental length, in particular of the vowel lal in the two 
source words. While the segments I'd I, III and I~ I had much the same 
duration in the two source words, the vowel lal was 201 ms in ymladd and 
145 ms in ymladd, a difference of 56 ms. While the first vowel of tonau 
and tonnau had been equalised in duration, this had not been done for the 
lal of ymladd and ymladd, and thus all the stimuli showed this difference 
in vowel length. The conclusion must be that the source word effect was 
conditioned solely by this difference in vowel length between the two 
source words. 
2.3.3.4. Discussion 
The effect of adding a pitch pattern, rather than presenting stimuli on 
a monotone, seems to be to increase the degree of agreement between 
subjects (as can be seen from the high values for the first and second 
indices of lists 3 and 4 in Fig. 9). Whether this increase in agreement is 
in the same direction for each of the two pitch patterns is another matter. 
The addition of pitch patterns also seems to polarise the trends of 
judgements, in that the nasal length effect and the source word effect are 
at their strongest and weakest in one of the 1 ists with Fo patterns 
introduced. 
The Fo pattern of list 3 seems to shift judgements towards ymladd, as 
can be seen from its high value for the second index in Fig. 9. This pitch 
pattern also allows the nasal length cue to come into its own, as the 
correlation between nasal length and ymladd judgements is at its highest 
in list 3 (being -0.57 at a very high significance level of p(0002). The 
degree of consistency between subjects is at its highest, while the source 
word effect is at its weakest (see section 2.3.3.3.), though it is still 
significant. These results, taken together, suggest that the pitch 
pattern of list 3 is in some sense a 'marked' intonation pattern, since it 
conditions the choice of a particular member of a minimal pair, in a 
s 
consistent fashion, and forces l~eners to make use of all possible cues, 
e~. the length of the medial nasal. It seems that a syllable that does 
not begin at a higher pitch than the preceding syllable is more likely to 
be judged stressed, and that this tendency is a consistent one. 
66 
The Fo pattern of list 4 does not shift judgements towards either 
ymladd or ymladd, as can be seen from its medium value for the second index 
in Fig. 9. This pitch pattern allows the length of lal (source word 
effect) to come into is own, as the correlation between source word and 
number of ymladd judgements is at its highest in list 4 (being 0. 85 at a 
significance level of p(0.0001). The degree of consistency between 
listeners is moderately high, while the nasal length effect is at its 
weakest (see section 2.3.3.3.), though it is still significant. These 
results, taken together, suggest that the pitch pattern of list 4 is in 
some sense an 'unmarked' intonation pattern, since it does not condition a 
choice of either member of a minimal pair, and forces listeners to make use 
of the cue of lal length. In the Welsh vowel system, all long vowels have 
a short counterpart which differs from them also in quality, except in the 
case of long and short la/. Here, it is length alone that differentiates 
reliably, and thus the listeners are in fact depending on a segmental 
phonological difference rather than on the pitch pattern in making their 
judgements. 
The fact that a source word effect was found is in fact advantageous 
from two points of view. First, it makes it even more remarkable that a 
reliable nasal length cue to stress was found at all, since the source word 
effect is working against the cue. This increases confidence that the 
discovered nasal length cue is a real effect and not an artefact of the 
experiment. Secondly, it makes the experimental stimuli approximate more 
closely to actual conditions of language use. This means that any effects 
found (nasal length cue, pitch pattern effects) are more likely to be 
operative outside the experimental situation. Thus what may have seemed 
to be a biassing effect in fact confirmed the strength and reliability of 
the observations made, and related the experimental findings a little more 
closely to conditions of language use . 
2.3.4 Comparison of perceptual experiments 
2.3.4.1. Nasal length effect 
In the following discussion, the various effects will be considered 
only in relation to the ymladdl ymladd pair, i.e. for lists 1,3 and 4 only. 
67 
List 2 has been omitted from the discussion because of the anomalous trend 
of judgements in this case, which showed that only the source word effect 
was operative (though the cause of the source word effect here was 
different from its cause' in the other three lists, the two causes may be 
traced back to different real isations of segmental phonological 
differences according to vowel type - see section 2.3.3.3.). Because of 
this difference, and also because list 2 showed no nasal length effect, 
this list will not be further considered. 
The nasal length effect was found to be significant in all three lists 
under consideration, though it varied in strength between the lists. The 
table below gives the (product- moment) correlation coefficients between 
nasal length as a percentage of word length and the number of ymladd 
judgements, together with the significance of the correlation. It also 
gives the coefficient of determination, which is derived by squaring the 
correlation coefficient and multiplying by 100, and which gives a measure 
of how much of the variability in one factor can be explained by the 
variability in the other factor. 
list 
3 
4 
Nasal length effect by list number 
correlation significance coeff. of determination 
- 0. 5444 0. 0004 30% 
- 0.5703 0.0002 33% 
- 0.3738 0.0208 14% 
It will be noted that the correlation i s very similar for lists 1 and 3, 
but much weaker and a little less significant in list 4. This means that, 
for the pitch pattern of list 4, it is less likely that the ultima will be 
more perceptually 'stressed' as the length of the medial nasal decreases . 
However, the factor is still present in list 4 at an acceptable degree of 
significance. 
From i nspection of graphs of number of ymladd judgements against nasal 
length, it seemed that the nasal length effect was only reliable when the 
length of the nasal was between 5% and 45% of the length of the word (see 
Fig . 11), since it is at around these points that the correlation breaks 
down . If the nasal is less than 5% of the word's duration, it is probably 
68 
.. ---- --- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - -- ..- --. - -- - - - - . . - -
------ -
/ 
no. of 
ymHldd Fig. 11: Plot of yml"Eldd judgements aga i ns t nasa l length judgements by source word 101 <*1 n f- ') n 0 0 0 n n n () () n (1 
.,. 
0 = source word ymlgdd 
"*' + = source word ymladd ~ ~ 91 () n .~ '" n n ('I C' (' 
" 
(1 n ,..., 
* = predicted values 
.,. 
-;: :;: 
from linear regression "t:: '" ; 
si + n 4 ~ 
" 0 () 
~ 1-
; ~ 
j: ;: 
7-1 0 
~ 
t-\ ''5 
" 
n n () 
4 
" l' <-
"" 
" 
.,. 6-1 -~ ~ ~ n () +- +- +- + +- () n T-
0, 
T-
.,. 
"l:: 
* 5-1 * I") n I) n -,:: -~ .,.. 
--:: ~ 
~ 
0) 41 ... + -;: n i- + f- i- n n n (!) ; 
* 
"*' '" ~ 
*' 3--1 + +- + of ... ~ f- ... n + f-T 
.,.. -
~ 
-*' 
,-
2--1 + + f- + +- +- f- .j:: ~ + III +-
-;: 
-" -;: l'
~ 
~ 1 -i 
+ n ~ 0 + + + + 
i-
T-
"" 
'I: 
'" 
.... 
.,. 
-1' 
.... .... 
l' ,. O-i t f- +- + t + + + 
* * 
• 
" 
7 Cl 1 1 .i ~ LS i 7 1 .) -/. t 
.d Le; 
. 
i.7 L'I 3 1 3 3 j"i j7 3 C .;1 -1:1 
-t " -+ 7 
nasal length as percentage of word length 
" . 
too short to be heard satisfactorily. (In this case, it consisted of about 
six very short cycles at the point in question - i .e. a stretch of about 20 
ms of nasal - in the stimulus of list 1) . This would lead to confusion on 
the part of the subjects, and a more random pattern of stress judgements . 
If the nasal is more than 45% of the word's duration (the absolute duration 
varied between the words) the result is rather unnatural in effect and 
could lead to distorted or random jUdgements . 
2. 3.4.2. Source word effect 
The source word effect was found to be significant in all three lists 
under consideration, though it varied in strength between the lists . The 
table below gives the (product- moment) correlation coefficients between 
source word (value 1 for original ymladd, and 2 for original ymladd) and 
number of ymladd judgements, together with the significance of the 
correlation and the coefficient of determination . 
list 
2 
3 
4 
Source word effect by list number 
correlation significance coeff. of determination 
0.1136 0.0001 51% 
0. 1608 0.0001 58% 
0.6499 0.0001 42% 
0.8480 0. 0001 12% 
It will be noted that the correlation is very similar for lists 1 and 3, 
but much higher in list 4. Here, it is even higher than that of list 2, 
where it was found to be the sole effect operative. This means that the 
phonological length of the /a/ is of much more importance when the word is 
subjected to the pitch pattern of list 4. However, the source word effect 
is still present in the other lists, though to only a minor extent in the 
first list. 
The 'accuracy indices' of Fig. 10 were calculated by dividing the number 
of stimuli correct! y marked as ymladd or tonau by the total number of 
ymladd or tonau judgements made, for each subject ansd each list . This 
index gives a measure of the subjects' ability to ident i fy accurately the 
source word of the stimuli - a high value would indicate a strong sour ce 
word effect . A value of 0.50 could be due to chance al one , as half the 
10 
stimuli originated from ymladd; thus only values consistently higher than 
0.50 should be seen as significant. The table below summarises these 
indices, giving the mean accuracy index over all ten subjects for each 
list number. 
mean index 
Source word effect based on accuracy indices 
list 1 
0.74 
list 2 
0.69 
list 3 
0.68 
list 4 
0.81 
This way of measuring the source word effect shows the same pattern as 
before, in that the value for list 4 is considerably higher than that for 
the other three lists, which are all similar. This table differs from the 
previous one in that the value for the first list is now higher than that 
for lists 2 and 3, whereas in the prev ious table the val ue for list 2 was 
higher than that for lists 1 and 3. However, both tables agree in 
assigning list 3 the lowest value for source word effect. 
The second way of measuring the source word effect is perhaps more 
accurate than the first, since the first method is based on treating a 
category variable (source word) as an integer variable, in order to obtain 
a correlation coefficient. This is a slightly dubious practice, 
statistically speaking, and is probably best abandoned for these purposes 
in favour of the second method. Both methods agree on the main trends, 
however; namely, that the source word effect is strongest in list 4, 
moderate in list 1, and weakest in list 3. 
2.3.4.3. Independence of the two effects 
Within each list, the nasal length effect (correlation of nasal length 
with ymladd judgements) was calculated for stimuli from each source word. 
In each case, it was not possible to show that the source word had any 
effect on the strength of the correlation. The conclusion is that the 
different source words did not give rise to different correlation 
coefficients . This means that the source word had no effect on the 
strength of the nasal length cue, and thus that the two effects were 
completely independent of each other. 
71 
Having established the independence of the two effects, a linear 
regression was arried out for lists 1, 3 and 4 together, the dependent 
variable being the number of ymHldd judgements, and the independent 
variable being the lenith of the nasal as a percentage of the word length. 
This model had an f-ratio significant at p<O.001, and thus its description 
could be relied upon. However, the coefficient of determination was low 
at 23~ and the coefficient of variation was high at 61~ indicating high 
variability and the presence of factors unaccounted for. This model was 
clearly not satisfactory. 
A similar linear regression was then carried out for lists 1, 3 and 4 
together, the dependent variable being the number of ymladd judgements, 
and the two independent variables being the nasal length and the source 
word (here treated of necessity as an integer variable, rather than as the 
category variable it actually was). This model had an f-ratio significant 
at p<O.001, and thus its description could be relied upon. The coefficient 
of determination was high at 71 %, and the coefficient of variation was 
lower at 38%, indicating lower variability and a greater number of factors 
accounted for. Thus the second model was far more satisfactory than the 
first, indicating, as expected, that both the nasal length effect and the 
source word effect need to be taken into consideration when predicting the 
number of ymladd judgements likely to be made. 
The output of this model was plotted as Fig. 11, where the values of 
'number of ymladd judgements' predicted by the model are superimposed on a 
plot of number of ymladd judgements against nasal length, by source word. 
It is clear from this plot that the predicted values are a reasonably good 
fit to the trend of the observed values. The source word effect is seen in 
the vertical separation of the two main blocs of observations; its lack 
of dominance is seen in the fact that some observations for each source 
word encroach on the territory of the other bloc. The nasal length effect 
is seen in the negative slope of the observations and predicted values; 
its lack of dominance is seen in the fact that there is a small degree of 
scatter around the two regression lines, some of this scatter probably 
being due to the source word effect. 
72 
The unaccounted-for variability in th~ improved model is probably at 
least partly due to the different Fo patterns of the three lists 
considered. However, it was not possible to break down the analysis still 
further by the addition of the variable 'list number', since the number of 
observations in each category would then have been unacceptablY small. In 
addition, while a case could be made for treating 'source word' as an 
integer variable, there is no basis for doing this with the 
uncompromisingly category variable 'list number', and so this type of 
linear regression could not be performed in these conditions. 
Despite the above limitations on the development of a model, a very 
rough notion of the contribution of 'list number' to the model may be 
obtained by considering the coefficients of determination for each of the 
two effects, for each of the three lists. These were shown in sections 
2.3.4.1. and 2.3.4.2., and are summarised in the table below, where they are 
also summed for each list. 
Contribution of the two effects to the model, by list number 
coefficients of determination for: 
list nasal length source word sum of both coeffs. 
3 
4 
0.2963 0.5092 0.8055 i.e. 81% 
0.3252 
0.1397 
0.4158 
0.7191 
0.74 10 i.e. 74% 
0.8588 i.e. 86% 
It has been established that the two effects are wholly independent in 
their operation (see start of this section) and so their coefficients of 
determination do not overlap. This means that it is a valid procedure to 
sum their coefficients of determination and treat the result as the total 
variability accounted for by the modeL The remainder constitutes the 
error, i.e. variability not accounted for. This error could be due to 
random fluctuation and/or to one or more undiscovered variables. However, 
where there is a high value for the summed coefficients, it is more likely 
that there is no third variable, and that the remaining variability is due 
solely to chance. 
It is clear from the table above that there is most remaining variation 
in list 3, and least in list 4. This means that the two effects discovered 
74 
can account for nearly all the variation in ymladd judgements for list 4, 
and that this pitch pattern does not in itself have any marked effect on 
listeners' jUdgements. On the other hand, the summed coefficients for list 
3 leave a sizeable amo~nt of variation unaccounted for, and it is quite 
probable that this large error represents the operation of a third factor 
(as well as random variation, naturally). In this case, the third factor 
would be the pitch pattern of list 3, which shifts judgements more towards 
ymladd (see section 2.3.3.4.) and thus has a significant effect in itself. 
The position of list 1 is intermediate, and thus inconclusive on the 
evidence available here; while it is possible that the error here 
disguises a third factor (i.e. the monotone pattern), it is also possible 
that the error is due solely to random fluctuation. The effect of the 
pitch pattern of list 1 must be estimated from other evidence, as follows. 
From sections 2.3.4.1. and 2.3.4.2. it can be seen that lists 1 and 3 tend 
to function together in opposition to list 4, in that the former two lists 
show a strong nasal length effect but weaker source word effect, and vice-
versa for list 4. This on its own would serve to assign also to list the 
above conclusions for list 3. Against this, however, should be set the 
finding, from Fig. 9, that lists 3 and 4 tend to show a similar high degree 
of agreement between subjects, while list is alone in showing a low 
degree of consistency in judgements between subjects. The conclusion 
would appear to be that the pitch pattern of list 1 (i.e. a monotone) is 
like that of list 3 in that it has a marked effect on stress judgements in 
its own right. (Whether this effect is in the same direction as that of 
list 3 is a different matter). At the same time, however, the pitch 
pattern of list 1 gives rise to more uncertainty in judgements, and thus 
its effect cannot be said to be as strong as that of list 3. The nature of 
the effect of a monotone thus established will be discussed in section 
2.3.4.4. below. 
2.3.4.4. Pitch pattern effects 
Accuracy of judgements A new accuracy index was calculated for each 
list, based on the source word of those stimuli judged to be ymladd. The 
number of correct ymladd judgements was divided by the total number of 
ymladd judgements, for each list. A low figure would indicate difficulty 
75 
in picking out those stimuli originating from ymladd - in other words, a 
weak source word effect. The figures gave no information as to 
consistency of agreement between subjects, unlike the indices in Fig. 10. 
The new accuracy indic'es are shown in the table below. 
list 
no. 
3 
4 
Accuracy of listeners' "ymladd" judgements 
from original from orig inal total index of 
"ymladd" "ymladd" judgements accuracy 
136 52 188 0.7234 
154 75 229 0.6725 
164 39 203 0.8079 
The same procedure was repeated using the listeners' ymladd judgements 
(stress on penult). The number of correct ymladd judgements was divided 
by the total number of ymladd judgements for each list. A low figure 
would indicate difficulty in picking out those stimuli originating from 
ymladd, and thus these figures supply the other aspect of the source word 
effect. These accuracy indices are shown in the table below. 
list 
no . 
3 
4 
Accuracy of listeners' "ymladd" judgements 
from original from orig inal total index of 
"ymladd" "ymladd" judgements accuracy 
64 148 212 0.6981 
46 125 171 0.7310 
36 161 197 0.8173 
From a comparison of the above two tables it will be seen that the 
greatest accuracy (i.e. greatest source word effect) was seen in list 4, 
for both ymladd and ymladd judgements. The other two lists, however, are 
not consistent between the two tables. List 3 shows much greater accuracy 
in ymladd judgements than in ymladd jUdgements. This is due to the fact 
that list 3 received a far greater absolute number of ymladd judgements 
than ymladd judgements, as seen from a comparison of the 'total judgements' 
for list 3 in each table. The other two lists did not have such a great 
discrepancy between the two types of judgement. The result is that list 3 
recei ved a large number of ymladd judgements, both accurate and 
inaccurate, and this led to a low index for accuracy of ymladd judgements 
76 
but a moderately high index for accuracy of ymladd jUdgements. Thus the 
pitch pattern of list 3 tended to influence judgements towards ymladd, as 
noted in sections 2.3.3.4. and 2.3.4.2. 
List 1, on the other hand, shows slightly more accuracy for ymladd 
judgements than for ymladd judgements, due to the fact that it received 
rather more ymladd judgements in absolute terms, both accurate and 
inaccurate. The discrepancy between types of judgement is not as great as 
for list 3, but is still markedly greater than that for list 4, which is so 
slight as to suggest a mere random fluctuation. Thus the pitch pattern of 
list 1 (a monotone) tended to influence judgements towards ymladd. In 
section 2.~~~ it was established that the pitch pattern of list 1 exerted 
an influence on judgements in its own right; it is now plain that this 
influence was in the direction of ymladd. 
Summary of pitch effects The situation for the three lists under 
consideration is summarised below. 
list 1 
list 3 
list 4 
shifts judgements towards ymladd 
much disagreement between listeners 
nasal length effect moderate to strong 
source word effect moderate 
shifts judgements towards ymladd 
much consistency between listeners 
nasal length effect strong 
source word effect weak 
does not shift judgements 
moderate consistency between listeners 
nasal length effect weak 
source word effect strong 
These findings are relevant to the intonational system of Welsh. On 
balance, it could be said that the pitch pattern of list 4 constitutes an 
'unmarked' intonational pattern, while those of the other two lists 
constitute 'marked' intonational patterns. This is because the Fo pattern 
in list 4 did not influence judgements in its own right, and allowed the 
77 
cue of segmental phonological length (of the lal vowel) to be taken into 
account more fully in judgements, due to the lack of 'interfering' cues. 
On the other hand, list 3 consistently conditioned ymladd jUdgements . 
Since the form ymladd is an example of an irregular and therefore 'marked' 
stress pattern in Welsh, it can be argued that the listeners were less 
likely to be expecting this form and perhaps more reluctant to mark it. 
Thus they would pay more attention to subsidiary cues such as the nasal 
length effect (at its strongest in list 3) in order to be certain in their 
jUdgements. This, of course, is merely speculation; but there does not 
seem to be any other obvious explanation for the facts summarised above. 
THus the pitch pattern of list 3 may be regarded as 'marked'. 
The pi tch pattern of list 1 (a monotone) conditioned a shift towards 
ymladd, though not as consistently as the opposite shift in list 3. The 
other features of list 1 are inconclusive, and thus no more can be said 
with certainty about this pitch pattern beyond the fact that it is 
'marked'. 
Discussion of pitch effects The list 4 pitch pattern, that seems to be 
'unmarked', has the penult on a lower pitch than the start of the ultima, 
while the ultima soon falls to a lower pitch. This is, in fact, the pitch 
pattern most often seen in prenuclear position for Welsh, where the 
characteristic 'head' takes the form of a gentle downward slope of stressed 
syllables (both penults and stressed monosyllables) wi th unstressed 
syllables bobbing above this line in pitch (see Thomas, C. H. 1967 and 
Williams 1980 for a description of this 'saw- toothed' head). The pitch 
pattern of list 4 could al so be interpreted as a 'nuclear tone'; with 
stress on the first syllable, it would constitute a 'rise- fall', and with 
stress on the ultima, a 'high fall' (see O'Connor and Arnold 1961 for an 
introduction to these terms). The fact that it could be interpreted as 
nuclear whichever syllable is heard as stressed may help to explain why 
this pitch pattern does not shift judgements either way; both the above-
mentioned nuclear tones are found in Welsh (Thomas, C. H. 1967, Williams 
1980). An important point to note is that under the 'rise- fall' 
interpretation, the unstressed ultima would carry the pitch glide; in 
other words, it would be pitch- prominent by the criteria generally used 
78 
-
(see O'Connor and Arnold 1961, Crystal 1969, for definitions of pitch-
prominence). The implication is that pitch-prominence, as such, is no cue 
at all to stress in Welsh - and neither is lack of pitch-prominence, since 
under the high fall in'terpretation the stressed penult would also be 
pitch-prominent. Thus there is no consistent Fo cue to stress in terms of 
pitch-prominence of the syllable in question. Where intonation does 
influence stress judgements, this is not by virtue of a simple mapping of 
pitch-prominence with stress, but by virtue of the existence of particular 
categories of possible intonational strucures, the influence of which can 
restrict the choices open to listeners in certain specialised conditions. 
The pitch pattern of list 3 is not found in the 'head' portion of the 
tone-unit in Welsh, since the great majoity of penults are not higher in 
pitch than their following syllable (Williams 1980). Thus it is not as 
'unmarked' a pattern as that of list 4, being less common. When considered 
from the point of view of nuclear tones, moreover, it could only be seen as 
nuclear if the stress were assigned to the second syllable, in which case 
it would constitute a low fall. If the stress were seen as lying on the 
first syllable, the resultant pitch pattern would not be one commonly 
found in Welsh at all. Herein lies the reason, most probably, for the 
tendency of the list 3 pitch pattern to shift judgements so consistently 
towards ymladd; the listeners are influenced by what they take to be a 
nuclear pitch pattern, and apply the only possible structure, in nuclear 
tone terms, to what they hear. It should be noted, however, that even here 
the nasal length effect is not obliterated. On the contrary, it is very 
strong, demonstrating that, strong as the effects of intonation in Welsh 
may be, they are certainly not strong enough to override the post-stress 
consonant cue to stress in all cases. 
The pitch pattern of list 1 (monotone) is found only rarely in the head 
portion of a tone-unit in Welsh, and thus is more 'marked' and uncommon a 
pattern than that of list 4. Considered from the point of view of head 
contours, each of the two syllables is equally likely to be the stressed 
one (unlike the situation in list 3) and so there is no positive 
intonational cue to stress placement. There is also no nuclear tone cue, 
since there are no level nuclei in Welsh, and so the listeners are not 
given much help by this pattern; a fact reflected by the high degree of 
79 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
inconsistency between listeners. Since the form ymladd is much the most 
common of the minimal pair in its stress pattern, it could be that this 
form is preferred by default, lead ing to a preponderance of ymladd 
judgements for want of any cue at all to the contrary. The nasal length 
effect is moderate to strong and the /a/ length cue is moderate, 
indicating that listeners are being forced to make use of all possible 
cues. The pitch pattern of list 1 is the least helpful of the three in 
intonational terms, since a monotone is both the rarest pattern found of 
the three and also, where it is in fact found, gives no intonational cue at 
all as to the stress pattern. In the other two lists, the pitch patterns 
are more common (particularly for that of list 4) and/or give cues to 
stress pattern from an intonational point of view (in the case of list 3). 
The specialised, uncommon, and unhelpful nature of the pitch pattern of 
list 1 is reflected in the low consistency of judgements here, the need to 
rely more on the two minor cues, and the need to have recourse to the 
default form ymladd for want of any strong cues . It should also be noted 
that, where Fo influences stress judgements, this is not in terms of pitch-
prominence (which is the same for all languages and forms the raw material 
for intonation) but in terms of intonational categories (which are 
specific to a particular language and not subject to modification) - this 
may well be the reason why pitch- prominence per se was found in the 
earlier sets of measurements not to be a reliable cue to stress in Welsh . 
2.4 Experimental findings 
2. 4.1 Summary of' ex perimental results 
The first set of measurements (section 2.1.) was by nature a preliminary 
experiment, serving to delineate the problem rather than to offer a 
solution. It was found that the stressed syllable in Welsh was quite 
unlike the stressed syllable in English from the point of view of acoustic 
cues, and that the most consistent cue to stress in Welsh, in the case of 
regularly-stressed disyllables, was the shorter duration of the stressed 
vowel . Since this set of measurements concerned only regularly- stressed 
disyllables, this conclusion should be taken to mean only that stressed 
80 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
penults are consistently shorter than unstressed ultimas in the case of 
words spoken in isolation. (Stressed monosyllables, on the other hand, 
contain indisputably l?ng vowels phonetically that often contain a pitch 
gl ide, as is the case for unstressed ul timas). The most intriguing 
find ing of this set of measurements is that the usual rel iable cues to 
stress in English and other languages (high Fo, high amplitude) are not at 
all reliable in the case of Welsh. Even in the absence of an identifiable 
positive cue to stress in Welsh, this finding would be an interesting one 
and a spur to further investigation. 
The second set of measurements (section 2.2.1.) checked the findings of 
the first set in the case of unrehearsed, connected speech. The same 
general trend was indeed found; namely, that the stressed syllable in 
Welsh has shorter duration, but cannot with certainty be identified with 
an y other acoustic cue. The fact that the same trend was found in this 
type of speech increases the probability that the trend was a real aspect 
of spoken Welsh and not merely an experimental artefact; thus more 
confidence can be placed in these findings. 
The third set of measuremens (section 2.2.2.) attempted to discover what 
it was that cued stress in Welsh, since inherent acoustic cues had been 
shown to be of little help. It was found that rhyt.hm is the foundation of 
stress in Welsh, and that the stressed penult retains its status of 
'stressed' not in virtue of any acoustic prominence it may have in its own 
right, but because of its function as the keystone of the rhythmic unit. 
This finding is perhaps the most theoretically significant of all the 
ex perimental results described here (see section 2.4.2. for a discussion 
of its implications). 
The fourth set of measurements (section 2.2.3.) was designed to check 
the findings of the previous measurements, to test for any variation in 
rhythmicality between two types of list, and to investigate the effect of 
syllabification. The results supported the earlier finding of a tendency 
to isochrony in Welsh, thus increasing confidence in this finding. The 
two types of list could not conclusively be shown to differ in 
rhythmicality, owing to the high degree of variability in the statistics 
for each list. It was found that there was a greater tendency towards 
81 
isochrony if the rhythmic feet were counted from the onset of the stressed 
vowel rather than including any initial consonants of the stressed 
syllable. This finding indicates a possible need to recognise two types 
of syllabification for different levels of analysis in Welsh; the more 
'abstract' and 'morphological' syllable division would include initial 
consonants within the stressed syllable and would be used for purposes of 
morphological processes, while the more 'concrete' and 'phonetic' system 
would count the stressed syllable only from the onset of the vowel, and 
would be used for purposes of rhythm and stress. 
The fifth set of measurements (section 2.2.4.1.) reverted to 
measurements of segments - in this case, of consonants. It was found that, 
in regularly-stressed disyllables with medial voiceless stop, the length 
of the post-stress stop was greater than the length of the consonant after 
the unstressed ultima. This discovery of greater length in the post-
stress consonant agrees with observations made auditorily in the past. 
The sixth set of measurements (section 2.2.4.2.) again concentrated on 
segments - in this case, vowels. The prepausal lengthening seen in other 
languages was also demonstrated here for Welsh. Less predictably, it was 
al so found that the stressed vowel was significantl y shorter than the 
unstressed vowel, when phonologically short vowels only were considered. 
This bears out one of the findings of the first and second sets of 
measurements. The segmental measurements thus lead to the conclusion that 
stress in Welsh is identified with shorter duration of the stressed vowel 
and longer duration of its following consonant. The finding is all the 
more interesting for not being the obvious one, and reinforces the belief 
that stress in Welsh is based on factors of timing rather than on pitch or 
intensity. What is not revealed is the reason why this relationship 
between vowel and consonant should be linked with phonological stress. 
The next experiments (section 2.3.) were of a perceptual nature, seeking 
to test for speech perception the findings that had been obtained for 
speech production in the earlier sets of measurements. The results of 
these perceptual experiments can be summarised as follows: 
82 
a) The duration of the following consonant is a cue to stress in speech 
perception, as it had been found to be for speech production. 
b) The length of the vowel of the ultima can also influence perception. 
This means that the word-pair ymladd and ymladd is not a true minimal 
pair, since the words are differentiated not only by stress placement 
but al so by the length of the /a/. However, they were the nearest pair 
obtainable to a stress-related minimal pair in Welsh, and thus this 
'source word' effect could not be avoided. 
c) Intonation can influence stress jUdgements. This influence, however, 
is not a direct mapping of pitch-prominence with stress, but is a more 
indirect matter of restriction of choice, under certain conditions, in 
accordance with the recognised intonational categories of Welsh, i.e. 
the possible nuclear tones and head patterns. However, intonational 
considerations never completely override the post - stress consonant 
cue to stress. 
d) Where the intonational pattern is unmarked, the stage is left clear 
for the operation of cues of segmental length; in particular, the 
vowel length cue in the case of this word-pair. 
e) Where the intonational pattern is marked and biassed towards a 
particular interpretation according to the recognised intonational 
categories of Welsh, then this interpretation will influence stress 
judgements but will by no means outweigh the post-stress consonant cue 
to stress. 
f) Where the intonational pattern is marked but not biassed to any 
interpretation according to intonational structure, then stress 
judgements are made (albeit less consistently) on the basis of 
segmental cues of duration (of the post- stress consonant, and of /a/ 
length in this pair), and also on the basis of the default or unmarked 
member of the word- pair. 
The general conclusion to be drawn from the perceptual experiments is 
that the perception of stress in Welsh is a complex composite of 
interdependent factors, and that stress and intonation, though different 
83 
in their basis, nevertheless interact in ways which the above experiments 
have only begun to investigate. 
2.4.2 Implications of the' results 
2.4.2.1. Stress as separate from intonation 
The above experimental findings contain two types of conclusion that 
are of relevance to the theory of stress in general; first, that stress 
and intonation are separate phenomena, and secondly, that stress is 
defined in terms of rhythm. 
The first conclusion accords with both the 'British' and the 'American' 
views of stress, which define it separately from intonation, though 
naturall y conced ing that stress and intonation can interact to a large 
extent. This view is at odds with the view of stress as 'accent' (see 
section 1.2.4.) propounded by Bolinger, who defined stress (his 'accent') 
solely in terms of pitch variation, relegating intonation to the area of 
degrees of pitch variation. Such a view treats phenomena traditionally 
regarded as part of intonation as being instead part of stress (or 
'accent'). It is therefore open to the charge of confusing stress and 
intonation, although, as has been mentioned, it makes allowance for 
intonational phenomena - it merely draws the line between stress and 
intonation in a very different place from other workers and from the 
present investigation. 
The experimental results presented here give concrete evidence , for 
Welsh, that stress must be defined in entirely different terms from 
intonation (conceived of as pitch variation, or degree of pitch variation, 
of any kind). The significance of these results is not that they 
reiterate what better scholars have said many times in the past on 
theoretical grounds - namel~ that stress and intonation are separate -
but that they prov ide concrete phonetic ev idence for this assertion -
namely, the lack of inherent acoustic cues to stress, and particularly the 
remarkable unreliability of pitch- prominence as a cue to stress. 
84 
2. 4. 2.2. Stress as defined in terms of rhythm 
The second conclusion to be drawn from these experiments is that stress 
in Welsh is defined in terms of rhythm. Having established that stress is 
to be defined independently of intonation, it remains to find this 
independent basis of stress. For the traditional 'British' and 'American' 
schools, the independent basis was seen as increased intensity or loudness 
on the stressed syllable (section 1. 2.2.), or else was seen as increase in 
Fo accompanied by increased articulatory effort and thus increased 
loudness (section 1.2.3.1.). Even the acoustic experiments into inherent 
cues to English stress (section 1.2.3.2.) concluded that the stressed 
syllable, though pitch- prominent, was also fairly consistently accompanied 
by increased intensity which could, if need be, override a contradictory 
pitch cue (Lieberman 1960). The integral of the amplitude with respect to 
time was found to be practically as reliable a stress cue as pitch-
prominence (Lieberman, op. ci t.). Thus the consensus view was that stress 
in English is based on intensity or loudness, though intonational effects 
can interfere with this pattern. 
Such a view of stress is not valid for Welsh on the evidence presented 
here, as intensity was found to be at best a most unreliable cue, while 
pitch patterns were no help at all (from a direct- mapping point of view) . 
The basis of stress in Welsh was found to be rhythm, and reliably so; 
while the only other consistent factor was also durational in nature (i .e. 
the length of the post - stress consonant), and could conceivably thus play 
a part in the rhythmic patterning . 
2.4.2.3. Linking the theoretical with the physical 
These two conclusions, if valid, could lead to a fundamental 
reappraisal of the nature and functioning of stress. The separation of 
stress and intonation would exclude the 'stress as accent' analyses, while 
the definition of stress in terms of rhythm would exclude all other past 
analyses. The only theory so far formulated that is not excluded by these 
conclusions is the new 'metrical' theory of stress (see section 1.2. 6. for a 
brief introduction to this theory). This theory defines stress in terms 
of the 'metrical grid' (loosely related to the 'prosodic structure'), while 
intonation is characterised independently by linking certain recognised 
85 
functional 'tunes' to the 'prosodic structure'. The metrical theory also 
sees stress as based on rhythm, which is defined on the metrical grid and 
functions alongside, but separately from, the categories imposed by 
intonation. 
The metrical theory has, to date, been elaborated and justified largely 
on grounds of theoretical elegance and abstract phonological 
considerations, such as Liberman's criticism of Chomsky and Halle's 'stress 
cycle' (see section 1.2.6.1.). It is here that the real significance of the 
present experimental findings is seen; namely, in providing a concrete, 
phonetic basis for categories and definitions so far advocated in abstract 
terms only. The linking of theoretical and experimental research is a 
notoriously difficult process, since the assumptions and methodology of 
the one aspect so often run counter to those of the other; to such an 
extent that there may sometimes seem to be no basis for comparison at all. 
In the niceties of theoretical elaboration this may well be true for the 
metrical theory also - the present study has nowhere near enough detail to 
test this - but in the fundamental definitions and assumptions of the 
theory a clear link can be discerned between abstract system- building and 
concrete experimentation . It is true that this link (so far, at least) has 
been established only in the case of Welsh; however, it is at least 
possible that the same conclusions will prove to be valid for English 
also. 
2.4.2.4. Extending the physical to the theoretical 
Having established a firm empirical basis for the separation of stress 
and intonation, and for the definition of stress in terms of rhythm (in the 
case of the Welsh language, at least), it now remains to investigate the 
theoretical implications of these two fundamental findings. This will 
involve a discussion and modification of the metrical theory of stress. 
The presentation will be, first, in terms of English, in order to make use 
of a language that is the most familiar to workers in this field, and also 
in order to show that the revised theory is at least descriptively 
adequate for English. The theory will be extended to describe certain 
problems in English intonation, in order to demonstrate its superiority in 
this field. The presentation will then be applied to Welsh - for which, it 
86 
will be remembered, there is now an established link between the metrical 
theory and the concrete facts of stress - and will then be extended to 
characterise the patterns of Welsh intonation, in an attempt to capture in 
theoretical terms something of the interaction of stress and intonation 
that was discovered on the physical level. 
The theoretical presentation will make no direct reference to the 
physical facts described earlier, since the link between the two aspects 
is at the fundamental level of assumptions and definitions, and as such 
does not itself enter into the details of the theory. Such a disregard of 
the physical facts, however, in no way implies that they are of no 
importance; on the contrary, without this demonstrated link the 
theoretical presentation that follows would be merely an alternative and 
more elegant theory and not, as is the case, a simpler and also more 
explanatorily adequate theory, firmly rooted in the physical facts of 
language use and branching out into the wider realms of meaning and 
communication. 
87 
3. THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
3.1. Syllable level 
At the start of the derivation, orthographic words and location of 
syllable nuclei are 'given'. The first stage is to mark each 
vowel/syllable nucleus as [+full] or [-full]. Liberman marks each vowel 
for [±stress], where [+stress] vowels are tense vowels or vowels before 
'strong clusters'. He sees this as a segmental feature, interacting with 
the metrical grid as follows: 
'1) initially, there is an assignment of the segmental feature 
[±stress] • 
2)second, there is a metrical bracketing of the word. 
3)third, there is an assignment of metrical node labels, on various 
principles. 
4)fourth, there is an adjustment of the distribution of the 
segmental feature [±stress J.' (L: 139) 
It is this feature which makes the distinction in the following, which 
have identical metrical structure but different syllable types. 
R R 
~ A 
s w s w 
I I I I 
mo dest gym nast 
+ + + 
The initial assignment of [±stress] is done on the basis of vowel 
tenseness, or the strength of the following consonant cluster, respecting 
word boundaries. The term 'stress' is here made to apply to a purely 
segmental feature conditioned by segmental features of the vowel itself or 
of following consonants. At this stage of the derivation it has no 
relation to syntagmatic aspects of the utterance, such as rhythm. This is 
all the more surprising in that stress comes to be seen later as dependent 
on the syntagmatic feature of metrical structure. In their discussion on 
the 'metrical grid', which is determined by the metrical structure, LP 
88 
wri te ' ... the "degree of stress" of a given syllable is represented by the 
height of the column of marks that stands over it.' (LP:312) 'Stress' is 
being used in two different ways here, unless the derivation is entirely 
circular (the syllable ' nucleus feature [±stress] determining metrical 
bracketing, which determines the 'metrical grid', wh i ch determines 'stress' 
on each syllable), Clearly, it is better to avoid using 'stress' for a 
purely segmental feature. This is what has been done under the proposed 
analysis, where the feature [±full] applies only to vowel segments and 
avoids any suggestion of circularity. 
In Liberman's theory, the metrical bracketing of the word follows . 
There are certain conditions on bracketing, stated in the form of rules 
inserting a 'foot boundary', symbolised as 'I', into the string of segments. 
These 'foot boundaries' divide the string into groups which the metrical 
bracketing cannot violate. The first two examples below are permissible, 
but in the third the metrical bracketing violates the foot boundaries, and 
so is not permissible. 
/\ ~ M 
X X I X X X X X I X X 
There are two 'foot boundary insertion rules', or conditions on well- formed 
bracketings: 
'a) All # boundaries are foot boundaries 
b) A foot boundary is inserted in the environment /[+][ - ]' (L:141) 
The next process is one of node- labelling: 
'In any lexical metrical constituent [MN], N is strong if and only if it is 
complex.' (L:142) 'Complex' means 'dominating non- terminal material'; this 
is the most general form of the rule. 
The initial values of [±stress] are then adjusted where appropriate, 
the most important redistribution rule being as follows: 
89 
s s 
---> 
+ 
The reason for this is that no's' may dominate a [-stressJ vowel. Other 
stress redistribution rules are: 
Case (for nouns) [-stressJ [+stressJ/ [-stressH-stressJII 
Case 2 (for verbs) [-stressJ [+stressJ/ [-stressJII 
Naturally, there are exceptions to all these rules, but 
basic process in Liberman's original work. An example follows: 
1) clas si fi ca tion initial [±stressJ assignment 
+ 
2) I Cl:S si fi I c: ti:n I foot boundary insertion 
si f~ I / ca tion bracketing 
+ 
R 
A~~ 
s VI 'W S w 
4) I Cl:S si fi C: ticn labelling 
1 
5) + [±stressJ adjustment: s 
this 
---> 
is the 
s 
+ 
Liberman's use of [±stressJ is therefore intimately connected with word 
stress, which is what his 'metrical bracketing' is also attempting to 
90 
account for : there seems to be unnecessary duplication here. Since the 
original idea behind metrical bracketing was to remove the need for an 
SPE- type [±stressJ feature assigned cyclically, this seems self- defeating. 
So instead of Liberman's [±stressJ, a different vowel feature will be 
proposed : [±fullJ. This distinguishes between ['9 J and ['8 J on the one 
hand (=[ - fuIIJ), and all other vowels on the other hand (=[+fuIIJ). What 
this feature is intended to express is the fact that, in English, [ ~ J and 
[~ J are the only vowels which cannot be stressed. All other vowels - even 
short ones - can conceivably be stressed; only [ - fuIIJ vowels never are. 
If a syllable with a [- fullJ vowel is stressed (e.g. for purposes of 
contrast), then the vowel quality is chang ed to one that is [+fuIIJ, as i n 
the following: 
/ / 
Ira li:vl ---> I rl li:vl IAnd t'1 ---> lA nd 3:1 
- + + + + + + 
Mostly, the new [+fullJ vowel fits in with the orthography. In the 
absence of any other clues (e.g. morphological alternations), it would seem 
that speakers are guided by spelling. 
The value [ - fullJ applies to vowels which are stress less even in 
ci tation form, needing especial emphas i s and a change in qual i ty and/or 
quanti ty before they can receive sentence stress. Syllabic consonants 
would ·also be [ - fuIIJ, being inherently stressless. The definite article, 
normally 'Ilia I' and therefore [ - fullJ, becomes '/cH:/' or 'lar /' before a 
word beginning with a vowel, and i s then [+fuIIJ. This is also the form it 
takes when given emphasis . 
The feature [±fuIIJ, unlike Liberman's [±stressJ, is concerned not with 
sentence stress but purely with the prerequisite for stress - i .e., a non-
reduced vowel. An example follows: 
+ + + + + - + + - + 
John gave the information to Susan's uncle 
91 
3. 2. WORD LEVEL 
At this stage of the derivation, syllables marked for [±fullJ are 
'given'. The next step is to form the metrical structure of each word. 
L and LP contain no formal distinction between word- level and phrasal 
level, and yet it is often necessary to make this distinction. L notes 
three differences between word stress and phrasal stress, pointing out 
that word stress assignment is subject to some arbitrary exceptions, does 
not always result in a structure suitable as input to metrical annotation, 
and is not entirely relational. (L: 138) 
Two other differences may be noted: the stress pattern of a phrase or 
sentence has a fair degree of optionality, while word stress is usually 
unalterable; also, if word stress should be changed, what is emphasised is 
the newly-stressed syllable, not, as in the case of altered phrasal stress, 
the object in the real world to which the newly- stressed unit refers. 
So there is a need to recognise a distinct word level, with its own 
units and rules, but which nevertheless follows the general principles of 
metrical bracketing. Such a system has been proposed by Elizabeth Selkirk 
(see Selkirk 1980 a and b). She sets up three units below the phrasal 
level: the syllable, 'stress foot', and prosodic word. 
3.2.1 Syllable, or 'cr' 
Most workers have accepted the existence of the syllable as a useful 
and indeed a necessary unit for suprasegmental description. Selkirk 
defines the syllable, for English, by means of the 'English syllable 
template', where brackets indicate optionality (see Selkirk 1980b:8)' 
92 
-syll (+son) 
+cons (- son) 
Her 'Maximal Syllable Onset Principle' formalises the finding that: 'In 
general, when a medial consonant or consonant cluster may be analyzed as 
ei ther a coda [i.e. syllable-final] or an onset [i.e. syllable- initial] 
according to syllabification principles, [i.e. according to initial and 
final consonants and clusters permitted in the language] it is the onset 
analysis which prevails.' (Selkirk 1980b:9) Selkirk draws a parallel 
between the relation strong/weak and the relation more/less sonorous, with 
respect to segments. Vowels are more sonorant than liquids, which in turn 
are more sonorant than fricatives or stops . Thus she represents 'flounce' 
as follows: 
S 
A 
w S w 
1\ A 1\ 
w S S W S w 
I I I I I I 
f 1 a w n s 
She wri tes: 'The peak is of course strong (~), i.e. more sonorous, than 
the onset. And within each of the other constituents, the s has been 
assigned to the more sonorous element.' (op. ci t.:5) She al so quotes Pike's 
suggestion that w/s assignment depends on 'a universally defined sonority 
hierarchy' (op. cit.:6) Selkirk's representation is merely a reformulation, 
93 
I 
I 
d 
in metrical terms, of the pattern developed by earlier scholars. She 
represents the earlier pattern as follows: 
Selkirk notes that, while the prosodic category 'syllable' is required 
in linguistic theory, there is no support for naming its internal 
constituents in the above way, and so she rejects them in favour of what 
she refers to as the 'le analysis of the syllable', citing past work which 
can be seen to support this analysis. This analysis also makes possible a 
unified treatment of the heavy/light syllable distinction, which plays an 
important part in stress systems. 'The light syllable ev can be 
characterized as one whose rhyme is simple, non- branching, while the heavy 
syllable, be it eve or evv (a long vowel) is one with a complex, or 
branching, rhyme.' (Selkirk 1980b:6) 
3 .. 2.2 Stress foot, or '2' 
The 'next' type of prosodic unit in the hierarchy is the (stress) foot, 
which Selkirk outlines for English by means of a set of templates for 
'basic feet', grouped into 'prosodic words', which are symbolised by lW' (see 
Selkirk 1980 b: 12). 
L 
I to ~ 
0' LS LW 
I I 
er er 
lA 
row bey t 
v G 
(VG = tense vowel or diphthong) p 
94 
ii) L w 
I ~ 
er ::Ls ::Lw 
Co 
V C1 
I I 
er er 
vIA 
t J I m n ce s 
ow 
1\ 
i v) the 'Super Foot' 
w w 
I I 
::L' 2' 
::Ls 2s 
I A 
er erw crs ow ow 
/"1\ A /\ /\ 1\ 
sow f a p if. m a 1 a 
Selkirk sees these templates as functioning as well-formedness 
conditions on underlying representations within the syntactic domain of 
the simple (i .e. non-branching) stem, in English. If a syllable is itself 
a foot, it will receive some degree of stress. 'The claim is thus that 
being a foot will give an individual syllable a status in prosodic 
structure that is distinct from that of a syllable which is not a foot, 
95 
that a syllable will be phonetically 'interpreted' differently depending 
on its foothood.' (Selkirk 1980b:13) It is in terms of the foot that she 
explains the distinction between the stress patterns of 'modest' and 
'gymnast' that is noted by LP: 
LP Selkirk 
cv 
1\ I A 
S 'vi a"s 0-", 
mo dest mo dest 
+ 
(£) 
/'\ 
s· VI 
/~ 
1: s 2: w I I 
IS IS 
gym nast gym nast 
+ + 
Selkirk's analysis has no need of the feature [±stressJ, and is 
therefore to be preferred, since the feature was (re-)introduced merely to 
deal with the fact that these two words, though stressed differentl~ had 
identical prosodic structure. In Selkirk's analysis, each has a different 
prosodic structure, reflecting directly the difference in stressing. 
However, this does not militate against the feature [±fullJ, since a 'OWl 
(metrically weak syllable which is not itself a foot) may contain either a 
[+ full J or a [-full] vowel, and so there is still a need for this 
distinction between inherently stress less and circumstantially stress less 
syllables. Representations of metrical structure in this study will 
include a Selkirk-style analysis at the word level, but will also have 
[±full] at the syllable level. The only condition is that a [-full] vowel 
must be part of a 'OWl - i.e. a weak syllable that is not itself a foot. 
A point to note about Selkirk's analysis into 'stress feet' is that it 
does not necessarily follow morphological structure; c.f. her analysis of 
'irrespective' (op. cit.:14) : 
96 
LW- LS LW 
/\ 
O'S ow 0- 0-
I !\ D 1\ 
r r r s p e k t I V 
The structure is determined by the following principles: 
'The Prosodic Word: Constituency 
The L are joined in a right branching structure. 
The Prosodic Word: Prominence 
Given a pair of sister nodes [N 1 N2 J, N2 is s iff it branches. (This is 
the Liberman and Prince Lex ical Category Prominence Rule)' (op. ci t.: 14) 
Unlike the syllable, the 'stress foot' was first described formally by 
Selkirk, who does not enter into an extensive justification of it. 
However, it seems a useful concept, from the examples given, and there 
seems to be a need for a unit intermediate between the syllable and the 
word. 
97 
3 .2.3 Prosodic word, or '00 ' 
Selkirk has little description of this unit, merely noting briefly the 
findings of other workers and stating that there seems to be 'a fair amount 
of evidence that the ill is a privileged domain of phonological processes.' 
- Cop. cit.:14L The prosodic word is formed out of stress feet according 
to the principles given above, and the syntactic domain of well- formedness 
is identical for the syllable, foot, and word in English, being the simple 
stem. In other languages, the syntactic domain may be something other 
than the simple stem, but Selkirk postulates as a universal constraint 
that it is the same for syllable, foot, and word. 
A point worth noting is that the lack of any clear definition of a 
prosodic word can lead to disagreement. For example, Selkirk analyses 
'absent- minded' as being made up of two prosodic words, where the higher 
node in this example does not constitute a named unit (Selkirk 1980b:16). 
/\ 
W (J) 
w s 
absent - minded 
However, I would prefer to analyse this as being just one prosodic word, 
along with other compound adjectives and also compound nouns, thus 
avoiding the use of nameless units and corresponding more closely to the 
semantic facts: 
w 
~, 
l\ A 
0-5 CT"w 0- o-w 0- er 
absent minded fish tank 
+ + + + + 
98 
Another point worthy of mention in connexion with the templates for 
'basic feet' is Selkirk's analysis of the words 'gymnast' and 'tempest', as 
follows (op. cit.:12): 
LS 
I 
w 
LW 
I 
er 0-
AA 
J r m n re s t 
L 
--------
os ow A A 
t 6 m p ~ s t 
Selkirk analyses 'gymnast' as two stress feet, to distinguish it from 
'modest', which, while having the same s-w structure, is made up of only one 
(bisyllabic) foot, of the same pattern as 'tempest' above. The basic 
templates in question are as follows, where the first is a monosyllabic 
foot containing a non-tense vowel, and the second is a bisyllabic foot 
with non-tense vowels: 
os ow 
AA 
v v 
It will be noted that, according to these templates, 'gymnast' could 
just as well be analysed as an example of the second pattern above. The 
same applies to 'tempest'. Indeed, the two words are very similar in 
segmental composition, and have practically the same relationship to 
Selkirk's 'English Syllable Template' below (op.cit.:8): 
99 
-syll (+son) +syll 
-syll +syll (+son) of peak 
or +cons of coda 
t m 
" J I m 
+cons (-son) 
- syll +syll +cons -son 
p 
n 
(or +son for 1nl) 
s 
s 
t 
t 
Clearly, it is not the hierarchical structure of the syllables that 
determines their different stress patterning into feet, since this 
structure is identical. The only difference which seems relevant is that, 
in the second syllable, 'tempest' has la l (in this dialect) while 'gymnast' 
has Ire I. There is no formal distinction made between different non-tense 
vowels in this analysis, which leads to the above identical patterns in 
terms of syllable structure. However, the two words are different in 
terms of foot structure, which Selkirk claims is based solely on 
hierarchical syllable structure. The only solution appears to be to allow 
the feature [±full] into the description, with the constraint that a 
syllable with a [ - full] vowel can never be a foot in its own right; in 
fact, this means that a [-full] vowel will always be analysed as 'ow', i.e., 
a weak syllable in a bisyllabic foot or in a superfoot, because of the 
100 
prescribed system of bracketing into feet. This condition is also 
relevant to Selkirk's 'Monosyllable Rule' (see start of 3.4.5. ). 
The structure of the two words would then be as follows: 
2:s 2:w 
o-s ow 
v 
J I m 
+ + + 
Thus it follows that [ - full] vowels are seen only in 'ow' units, while 
[+full] vowels are also seen in 'o-s' or '~:L' units. This is so in the 
other examples given by Selkirk with the 'basic foot' templates. The 
various positions taken in this matter can be stated simply: 
LP regard 'modest' and 'gymnast' as having the same prosodic structure 
but different segmental structure, as expressed by their use of [±stress] 
to mark vowels. 
Selkirk regards the words as having different prosodic structure but 
the same segmental structure (insofar as she is interested in the nature 
of segments at all). 
I regard them as having both different prosodic structure and different 
segmental structure (though there is no need to posit any sort of 
causality here). This view is necessary for a correct account of the 
similari ties and differences between words of the type 'modest', 'gymnast', 
and 'tempest' . 
101 
To return to our consideration of the 'prosodic word' as a unit: the 
recognition of a separate word level, distinct from the phrasal level and 
with its own units and well- formedness conditions, seems to be necessary. 
The definition of what constitutes a 'word' has always been fraught with 
problems, and this analysis likewise has scope for disagreement. But the 
use of 'stress feet' in well-defined patterns seems to offer at least an 
approximation to a solution, in that they allow for a level intermediate 
between word and syllable which could be the location of units which, for 
want of such a level, have been variously assigned to the syllable or the 
word level. 
The stress foot also makes clear the progress from two lexical words to 
loose compound to close compound, as in the following: 
tV 
I 
w 
A 
LS LW 
w 
I 
Z' L' 
s 
1\ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ os ~ ~ 
light er man light er man light er man 
+ + + + + 
In the first example, the units are two separate prosodic words. In the 
second example, the units are separate 'stress feet' within the same 
prosodic word - this could be termed a 'loose compound'. In the third 
example, the units are subsumed into the same stress foot and therefore of 
necessity are in the same prosodic word - this could be termed a 'close 
compound'. (In the last example, the vowel of 'man' is a syllabic 1nl, and 
so the stress foot conforms to the template.) This process is one of 
reduction, both semantically and phonologically, and has two stages. Use 
of the 'stress foot' enables these stages to be characterised in a clear 
way. 
102 
The diagram below gives an example of structure at the 'word level', the 
horizontal lines being added merely to make the structure easier to 
discern. 
I 
W W W 
z 
I 
+ + + + + + + 
John gave the in for ma tion to Su san's un cle 
103 
3 .3. SEMANTIC LEVEL 
3 .3.1 Thompson's features 
In L and LP, there is no consideration of the semantic content of words. 
In Thompson (1980) words are marked for semantic features, as follows: 
i) [±SALIENTJ 
'Feature of words, determined by the grammatical category 
thereof, ... ' (Thompson 1980:138). 
+salient words are: adj ecti ve, adverb, demonstrative pronoun, 
intransi ti ve preposition (e.g. the/night be/fore), noun, negati ve auxiliary 
(e.g. that/weren't/opened), negative (e.g. not, never), number, participle 
(past, passi ve, present), quantifier, verb, verbal particle. 
-salient words are: article,auxiliary, complementiser, conjunction 
(though there is uncertainty with 'since', 'because', etc,) , copula ('be', 
'become', also main verbs functioning as copula, e.g. 'grow' + adj.), 
determiner, dummy ('there', 'it'), particle ('of' in e.g. fall of/those, 'to' 
in e.g. /went to/sleep, have to/clean), possessi ve pronoun, preposition, 
pronoun, relati ve pronoun. 
The distinction between +SALIENT and - SALIENT seems to correspond, 
though only very roughly, to the well-known distinction between lexi?al 
and nonlexical words, respectively - i.e. members of open and of closed 
sets respectively. Lexical words refer to objects or actions in the real 
world, or else have some kind of semantic content, while nonlexical (or 
'grammatical') words are devoid of semantic content or reference to the 
real world, and possess only a grammatical or logical function. The 
distinction, however, is not perfect in all cases. 
in ZCONTENT 
'Feature of groups or words or rarely syllables (+CONTENT only), assigned 
prior to the footmaker on a semantic basis, basically to reverse the 
effects of ±SALIENT.'Cloc.cit.) 
104 
iii) +HIGHLIGHT 
'Feature of groups or words or rarely syllables, assigned prior to the 
footmaker on a semantic basis, for emphasis or contrast.' (loc.ci t.) This 
feature never seems to . take a negative val ue, in Thompson's use, and so is 
not of the same order as the other features. 
i v) .:tFOC US 
'Feature of intonational sub-constituents, groups, words, or syllables. 
+FOCUS is assigned prior to the footmaker on a semantic basis, to indicate 
the locus of principal communicative content within each constituent.' 
Thompson's features are used to locate accented syllables and main 
stress, drawing on the LP 'metrical' theory of stress. It seems curious to 
have a feature, ±CONTENT, merely to reverse the effects of another feature, 
±SALIENT, and there is no very satisfactory explanation of how exactly the 
features ±CONTENT, +HIGHLIGHT, and ±FOCUS are assigned in the first place. 
Also, the use of binary features is limiting, necessitating the splitting 
of the . notion of semantic weight into two or more features, when a scalar 
type of representation would be less clumsy. In fact, something like 
Thompson's feature system can be used as the basis for an n-ary 
description of semantic weight, as follows. 
The feature ±SALIENT is based on the notion that certain syntactic word 
classes nearly always have at least some semantic content or reference to 
the real world, while other word classes nearly always have none. This 
insight is a valuable one, since it allows for especial characterisation 
of any words which depart from the norm, and which therefore should not be 
indiscriminately classed together with words that have that value as their 
norm. This primary division can be seen as analogous to the feature 
[±fullJ for vowels, which distinguishes vowels which are at least 
potentially stressable from vowels which are non-starters as far as stress 
is concerned. When one of the latter class of vowels departs from the 
norm, the vowel's quality is changed, and also there is likely to be a great 
increase in duration and intensity, which does not occur in syllables 
normally containing a vowel of this quality. Similarly, a normally 
-SALIENT, -CONTENT word, when given especial emphasis so that it becomes 
+CONTENT, has extra intensity and duration not found in words that are 
normally +CONTENT. Also, a normally +SALIENT word can become completely 
105 
devoid of semantic weight. This is the phenomenon of 'anaphoric 
destressing', whereby some material in the utterance, being in some sense 
'old information' (e.g. mentioned previously in discourse, understood by 
both speaker and hearer), becomes completely redundant semantically and is 
consequently destressed. For example, a possible answer to the question; 
'When did you see my husband?' would be 'I saw your husband yesterday 
afternoon', in which the words 'I saw your husband' are old or 'given' 
information, and therefore non-prominent, while 'yesterday afternoon' is 
the 'new' information, and receives main stress. In the case of anaphoric 
destressing, under Thompson's system, a normally +SALIENT, +CONTENT word 
would become +SALIENT, -CONTENT (or perhaps even -SALIENT, -CONTENT, though 
he does not go into this). 
3 .3.2 Matrix versus grid 
One drawback of using features such as these is that a full feature 
specification will have the structure of a matrix. That is, every cell in 
the matrix may be occupied by either a plus or a minus value; although 
there may be a degree of redundancy or predictability stemming from the 
nature of the features, there is none at all stemming from the nature of 
the matrix framework, since this does not constrain formally the 
permissible values at various positions. To take an example from 
segmental phonology: a segment which is [-continuant] must also be 
[-syllabic] (in English at least), and a segment which is [+syllabic] must 
also be [+voice] (again, in English at least). There is no particular 
directionality in redundancy for these features. Features dealing with 
place of articulation have only a limited degree of directionali ty, and 
even this is based on the configuration of the vocal tract, rather than on 
the formal nature of the features themselves. The features are usually 
arranged in a list beside the matrix, beginning with the major class 
features. However, this is only by convention, and there is no 
justification in formal terms for not listing the features in random 
order. 
106 
It is at this point that a feature matrix differs from a 'metrical grid' 
of the type formulated by LP (see section 3~ 5J. In a metrical grid, a 
constituent can be present at a given level only if there is a constituent 
present in the same coiumn at the previous level. Thus the order of the 
levels, or rows, is critical, and what happens at one level has an 
automatic effect on later levels of the same column. Redundancy rules can 
therefore be subsumed into the general principle that a place- holder in a 
given column at one level assumes the presence of place- holders in the 
same column at all previous levels. This principle is not based on the 
inherent nature of each row (with segmental phonology this nature would 
differ from row to row, e.g. [±continuant], [±low]), since there is no such 
difference in kind between rows, rather a difference in degree. The 
principle is based on purely formal properties of the metrical grid and of 
the hierarchical prosodic structure that it represents in serial form; 
Le. the preservation of relati ve prominence under embedding and the 
consequent need to recognise distinct levels of relative prominence, 
symbolised in the grid as the different rows. 
The idea of a grid construct seems a useful one in connex ion with 
semantics also . Thompson's features, like any other type of feature, have 
no formal directionality of the type outlined above, and any tendency to 
such directionality would have to be handled by ad hoc constraints. 
3.3.3 A semantic grid 
Instead, I will describe a kind of 'semantic grid' to deal with the 
phenomenon of relative semant i c we i ght which Thompson's features are 
intended to describe. The grid has an inbuilt directionality of the kind 
outlined above, and each successive row is to be seen not as a particular 
feature, but as a new degree of the same feature, [content], meaning 
'relati ve semantic weight'. It will turn out to be n- ary, taking val ues 
from 0 to 3. However, it is not merely a disguised simple n- ary feature, 
as will be seen, since it takes account not merely of inherent semantic 
weight but al so of relative, or syntagmatic, semantic weight in a 
particular utterance. 
107 
For the first level, there is a representation of the phenomenon 
captured by Thompson's ±SALIENT, analogous to [±full] for vowels; i.e. the 
distinction between words that are potentially stressable and words that 
do not have even the prerequisite semantic content to be stressable, at 
least in the particular utterance under discussion. This distinction can 
be represented as follows: 
First the word class of each word (or '(0') is determined, and on the 
basis of this, a place-holder assigned to every word having the first 
degree of semantic weight. These are more or less the word classes 
designated as +SALIENT by Thompson, with the exception that prepositions, 
marked by him as -SALIENT, are accorded the first degree of [content]. All 
other classes have no place-holder: a dash indicates this, while '0' 
symbolises the place-holder. An example of the first row follows: 
o o o o o o 
N v det N p N N 
John gave the information to Susan's uncle 
The second level is applicable only to those words which already have 
the first degree of [contentJ. Under normal circumstances, this level 
will replicate the assignment of place-holders on the first level. 
Exceptions are prepositions and negatives, which have been noted as having 
a level of semantic content intermediate between other grammatical words 
and lexical words. L writes: 'Some nonlexical words (e.g. not) seem 
normally to have a certain prominence, so that in the usual case they do 
not undergo ... attachment, although it is certainly possible for them to 
'glom on' [sic] intonationally.' (Liberman 1975:110) Thus these words 
will not receive a place-holder at the second level. Similarly, words 
which are not unexpected in the context will also fail to receive a second 
'0', since they have a reduced degree of semantic weight. In the case of 
anaphoric destressing, the words which constitute 'old' information do not 
even receive a place- holder at the first level, and so are not represented 
at the second level. Most utterances, however, will contain neither of 
these cases of semantic reduction. 
108 
o 
o 
N 
o 
o 
v det 
o 
o 
N 
o 
p 
o 
o 
N 
o 
o 
N 
John gave the information to Susan's uncle 
The third and final degree of [content] is concerned with what Thompson 
refers to as +FOGUS: 'the locus of principal communicative content within 
each constituent'. This is normally assigned to one column only; 
naturall~ this must already have two place-holders. It is usually the 
last such column in the utterance. 
o 
o 
N 
o 
o 
V det 
o 
o 
N 
o 
p 
o 
o 
N 
o 
o 
o 
N 
John gave the information to Susan's uncle 
2 2 o 2 2 3 
The numbers underneath the grid refer to the height of each column, and 
are the val ues of [content] which are then transferred to the full 
prosodic representation. 
3.3.4 Semantic grid versus n-ary feature alone 
3.3.4.1 Importance of the syntagmatic dimension 
At first sight, it might seem that this is merely an over-elaborate 
system for determining the values of [content], which could be seen as no 
more than a simple n-ary paradigmatic feature on the lines of a phonetic 
feature such as [vowel height]. Since a value of two implies that the 
value 'one' has been reached and passed, or a value of three implies that 
the values 'one' and 'two' have been reached and passed, the 'semantic grid' 
is quite unnecessary if semantic content is seen as a purely paradigmatic 
phenomenon. The value of a grid construct lies in its formal property of 
allowing relationships within each level to be represented in an explicit 
109 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
fashion. Naturally, this is only relevant if syntagmatic relationships 
are seen to have a bearing on a word's semantic content. 
I would argue that they do indeed have an influence, and that this 
influence is most clearly represented by the semantic grid. The semantic 
prominence of a word is affected by the other words present in the 
utterance, as well as by any inherent properties of the word. This can be 
seen in the case of a preposition, e.g. 'underneath'. In most cases this 
will have the value [1 contentJ, as in the following: 
0 
0 0 
0 0 0 
Npron aux V P det N 
It was placed underneath a newspaper 
0 0 2 0 3 
In utterances with few lexical words, however, this word is capable of 
carrying greater weight semantically, as in the following: 
o 
o 
o o 
Npron aux V P det N 
It was placed underneath a newspaper 
o 0 o o 3 
In this case, the last word is the only one to have more than the first 
degree of [contentJ, while, of the remaining words, the preposition alone 
has any value of [contentJ greater than nought. Thus it assumes greater 
relati ve prominence, while remaining subordinate to the last word in 
semantic weight. Under certain circumstances - such as emphatic speech, 
where the speaker intends to make every word count - this configuration 
will result in the preposition becoming prominent, for want of any other 
non- final stressable word. In such a case, the preposition becomes 
[2 contentJ by a rule applying to the second level only, attempting to 
minimise the intervals between place- holders. 
110 
~-------------------------g 
In some utterances, the preposition may be the only vlord with any 
positive [content] value, as in the following, where the second pronoun is 
not the emphatic pronoun: 
o 
Npron aux P Npron 
It was underneath it 
o o o 
Similarly, the preposition here would become [3 content], by a rule 
scanning the second level and inserting a place- holder if there are none 
to begin with, or if an unacceptably long stretch must be broken up. The 
third- level place-holder is inserted on the last 2- column, as usual. 
These examples show that an identical [content] value can have varying 
semantic weight, relatively speaking. This is shown most clearly by a 
grid, since what determines semantic weight is the relationship between 
words at each level; this is something that cannot be expressed by the 
simple number values of [content]. The principle holds even at the first 
level, as seen in the case of the following, where neither pronoun is of 
the I emphatic' , j pointing- out' type, that can be stressed : 
Npron cop Npron 
It was it 
o o o 
It is very difficult to produce this utterance without either a) making 
one or both of the pronouns into the emphatic type that insists on the 
identi ty of a particular thing as distinct from anything else in the 
world, or b) giving emphatic stress to the copula as if to deny an earlier 
negative assertion or presupposition. On the basis of word class, all the 
words are semantically empty. However, a rule of the type mentioned 
previously would also apply to the first level and, finding no place-
holders at all, would proceed to insert one. As there is no clue as to 
which word would receive one, this would be done either a) on the word that 
the speaker wishes to emphasise, or b) on the last word, if there is no 
111 
emphasised word. Rules at the second and third levels, following the 
usual process, would assign [3 content] to the word thus marked out. If 
there were no emphasised word, and the last word thus became [3 content] 
by default, the result of putting the focus of the utterance at this point 
would be to make it seem as if that word were emphasised, and not merely 
the unemphatic bearer of main stress. Even without special devices (such 
as a pitch glide or a jump to higher pitch on that word), it would strike a 
native speaker as sounding emphasised in some way, simply because such a 
word does not normally receive any stress at all. This is the reason why 
the procedure at the first level is slightly different ( in that the 
assignment of place-holders can depend on speaker intention, not on 
previously- ex isting place-holders ) . At the second or third levels, the 
same rule need only ' look for' a previously-existing column or columns to 
break up an unacceptably long stretch. The result of this operation will 
be not to produce the emphatic type of stress, but simply to produce an 
utterance with unemphatic stress on a word which, though it has some 
positive value of [content], does not normally have this amount of stress 
in the utte rance. 
3.3.4.2 Inability of an n-ary feature to deal with the syntagmatic dimension 
It may be argued that the same results can be obtained more simply by 
using numbers from the start. It is probably true that the same results 
can be obtained- in most cases, at least - but the process would be far 
less simple. One would begin by assigning values of [content] to all 
words; 0 for non- lexical words, 1 for prepositions, negatives and .any 
words with reduced semantic weight in context, 2 for all lexical words but 
the last (excluding those mentioned under value 1), and 3 for the final (or 
the focussed ) lexical word (where this is not one of those mentioned under 
value 1) . This would present few problems in most utterances; but in some 
cases, such as those discussed earlier, there would need to be revision. 
For example, in the sentence 
It was underneath a newspaper 
o o o 3 
gi ven the difficulty of producing the non-focussed material with the 
requisi te low amount of stress, one could apply a rule roughly as 
follows: -
112 
[1 content] ---> [2 content] / 0 0 (0) 0 
Similarly, in the sentence 
It was underneath it 
o o o 
this rule applies, together with a rule changing [2 content] to 
E3 content] in the absence of any original E3 content] word. In the 
sentence 
It was it 
000 
there would be a need for a different rule, such as the following -
[0 content] ---> [1 content] / ## 
(condition: no original [1,2 or 3 content]) 
This would only hold for those utterances of this type where no one 
word receives especial emphasis . The other two rules would then apply. 
3 .3.4.2.1. Thompson' s algorithm 
The process outlined above is an awkward process, and would probably 
require sev eral more rules in order to cover all the possible 
configurations. More promising is the type of algorithm suggested by 
Thompson for the metrical grid (of which more later). The algorithm is as 
follows : -
tFl For all words in the input constituent, normalize and adjust their 
metrical grid as follows: 
1) If the word is +SALIENT, make the height of the column over the DTE 
of the word equal to 4. Take the DTE of a one syllable word to be that 
syllable . [DTE = 'designated terminal element ' : that syllable of a word 
which is reached by following only's' nodes down the metrical tree of the 
word. ] 
2) Make the height of all columns which are neither over the DTE nor of 
height 1 equal to 2. 
3) For each syllable in the word which is marked - FOCUS, decrease the 
height of its column by 1, unless it is already a l-column. 
if If any syllable of the word is +CONTENT [Le. Thompson's version of 
+CONTENT], set the height of its column to 4. 2) For each syllable in 
the word which is - CONTENT, decrease the height of its column by 1, unless 
it's already a l - column. 
F2A Proceeding from right to left through the metrical grid of the 
113 
constituent, identify a column as clashing on the basis of the membership 
of the Clash Set at that point. 
The Clash Set is initially empty (at the right end of the constituent), 
and its membership is updated at each grid position as follows on the 
basis of the column at that position: 
1) If the column is a 1- column, there is no clash. Remove 2 from the 
Clash Set and carry on. 
2) Otherwise, if the column is a 2- column, then if 2 is a member of the 
Clash Set, there is a clash. Otherwise, remove 4 from the Clash Set, add 2 
to the Clash Set, and carry on. 
3 ) Otherwise, the column is a 4-column. If either 4 or 2 is a member of 
the Clash Set, there is a clash. Otherwise, add 2 and 4 to the Clash Set 
and carry on.' (Thompson 1980:139) 
Thompson's algorithm assigns a single value to each word, on the basis 
of its semantic features; this is roughly equivalent to assigning each 
word a value of [content] on the basis of word class membership, etc. from 
the outset. The algorithm then applies to the sentence in a linear 
fashion, identifying clashes, which would need to be resolved by means of a 
rhythm rule where possible. Thompson's 'metrical grid ' is rather 
different from that of LP; for although he assigns column heights to words 
according to LP 's principles (following metrical structure, i.e. 
prosodic / syntactic structure), the first part of this algorithm is 
concerned with radically modifying - or 'normalizing' - this grid on the 
basis of the semantic features assigned by Thompson. Therefore his grid 
cannot truly be called a metrical grid, since its composition, and the 
relationships between its constituents, are determined mostly by semantic 
considerations. It is in fact closer in character to the 'semantic grid ' 
proposed here, though there are important differences between the two 
approaches. 
33.4.2.2. Thompson's algorithm really an n-ary feature: a modified version 
The algorithm presented by Thompson in ' F2A' ( for the identification of 
clashes) applies to each unit as a whole and does not break up the grid 
into its component levels. Therefore, there is little point in using a 
grid construct; single numerical values would do this job far more 
114 
simply. Possibly a Thompson-type algorithm, adapted to deal with 
I cOlumns' represented explicitly as what they essentially are, i.e. 
numerical values, could come nearer to solving the sort of problem 
presented in section 3.3.4.2.0., where each value applies to one unit (i.e. 
word), and is processed as a whole. This algorithm would not primarily be 
a process of locating clashes, but would be a series of rules assigning 
values of [content] to words according to context as well as according to 
word class. For instance, given an input of a string of words with 
utterance-final boundary and word class specifications, the sentence 
It was placed underneath a newspaper 
o o 2 o 3 
would be generated with these val ues of [content] by an algorithm that 
simply took into account word class and utterance-final position. In the 
sentence 
It was underneath a newspaper 
o o o 3 
the same rules would apply, but also there might be something analogous to 
Thompson's 'C lash Set l (only this would store the value of a variable 
rather than, as in Thompson's algorithm, constant numerical values). The 
procedure would be something like this: -
At the start of the utterance, set the variable, or 'threshold', to a 
certain value, and process the first word. This is assigned a certain 
value by the word class membership rules. If the assigned value is less 
than the threshold value, subtract one from the latter and move to the next 
word. If the assigned value is equal to or greater than the threshold 
value, add one to the assigned value, reset the threshold value to its 
original value, and move to the next word. 
The advantage of this method of description, limited though it may be, 
is that the original value may be altered to correspond to changes in the 
overall emphasis of the utterance. A low threshold will ensure that more 
words have values of 2 or perhaps even 3 as well, while a high threshold 
will prevent many high values of [content] from appearing. Thus a low 
threshold corresponds to emphatic speech and a high threshold to 
unemphatic speech, where few words have much semantic weight. 
115 
3 .3.5 A possible solution 
3 .3.5. 1 The problem 
Although this algorithm is an improvement, it is still not ideal, since 
it deals with each word only once and therefore cannot take account of the 
different degrees of semantic weight in themselves. There is no method of 
controlling the number or distribution of the various values of [content], 
since these depend ultimately on word class. Yet in English it seems to 
be a general fact that there will not often be long uninterrupted strings 
of lexical words or of nonlexical l'-lords; if these do occur, the lexical 
words will be greatly lengthened, the nonlexical words much shortened -
-or, alternatively, some lexical words will be reduced in stress, some 
nonlexical words increased in stress. The most common pattern is a fairly 
even alternation between lexical and nonlexical words. This kind of fact 
is difficult to express in terms of the algorithm outlined above, which 
has no way of dealing with restrictions such as the following (which are 
geared towards short sentences uttered at medium tempo ) : 
i)there will usually be not more than two words (of either kind ) between a 
[ 1 content] word and the next [ 1, 2 or 3 content] word; that is, it is 
unusual for more than two [0 content] words to occur together in the type 
of fairly short sentence under consideration. 
ii ) there will usually be no more than three words (of either kind) between 
a [2 content] word and the next [2 or 3 content] word. 
iii)there will usually be no more than five words ( of either kind ) between 
a [3 content] word and the next [3 content] word. 
Some ex amples follow: -
0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
The cat sat on the mat The dog bit the man 
0 2 2 0 3 0 2 2 0 3 
116 
0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
P N N Npron aux V adj det N 
By Tuesday afternoon, he had done all the work 
2 3 0 0 2 2 0 3 
3 .3.5.2 The algorithm 
It can be seen that there is a reasonably even distribution of 
[content] values, but not a random distribution: [3 content] is 
relatively rare, and [2 content] relatively common. The following is a 
tentative solution to the problem of describing these facts, and is by no 
means a fully elaborated theory. 
The ' semantic grid', under the proposed approach, is dealt with level by 
level, starting at the first degree of [content] and working from 'left' to 
'right' through the utterance. As before, there is a threshold variable, 
with a reset val ue of 1 at this level. The algorithm takes the form 
outlined earlier, with the difference that this is now formulated in terms 
of assigning rather than locating and modifying. (However, unlike 
Thompson's proposals, this is not intended as a production model, but 
merely as a set of well - formedness conditions on the final 
representation .) As the algorithm proceeds along the string, for each 
word encountered and assigned no value, a value of 1 is subtracted from the 
variable. As the latter reaches a lower value, it becomes more likely that 
a word will be assigned a place- holder (i.e . will take at least this degree 
of [content]), if it can possibly have this (i.e. if it is either lexical or 
especially emphasised). After assigning a place- holder, the threshold 
value is reset and the procedure continues as before to the end of the 
string . Naturally, when the threshold value is as low as 1, it is quite 
likely that several successive words will be assigned a place- holder at 
this level . There is no absolute necessity for one to be assigned as soon 
as the threshold reaches 0 (on any level); it is merely more likely to be 
assigned as the threshold decreases. This aspect of the algorithm is 
intended as a crude approx imation to the high degree of optionali ty 
117 
present in language; speakers may vary the relative semantic content of 
words according to the information they wish to communicate, and many 
statements, in semantics particularly, can only be framed in roughly 
statistical terms based on the most frequently-occurring patterns. 
The procedure is the same at the second and third levels, the only 
difference being the reset value of the threshold. On the second level, 
for the type of simple short sentences exemplified earlier, the reset 
value would be 2, while on the third level it would be 4. The values are 
changed in accordance with the overall length and/or emphaticness of the 
utterance, a low threshold corresponding to a short sentence or 
emphatically-spoken long sentence, and a high threshold to a longer 
sentence or unemphatic short sentence . The difference between the reset 
v'al ues of the second and third levels need bear no relation to that 
between the reset values of the first and second l evels, and will in most 
cases be substantially greater. These features also are intended to 
reflect the optionality inherent in language use . 
3.3.5.3 Flexibility in the algorithm 
There is another point concerning the reset values of the threshold at 
each level. At the first level, this would almost always be 1; the 
assignment of place- holders is largely dependent on whether the word is 
lex ical or otherwise eligible at this level. It is only in cases of 
anaphoric destressing, contrastive stress, or unaccustomed emphasis of 
nonlex ical words, that the speaker's intention overrides the normal 
pattern. On the second level, there is slightly more freedom; although 
the assignment of place-holders may be partly dependent on word class, 
there is al so more scope for processes such as a slight reduction in 
semantic weight for a word which is not unexpected in context (whether 
discourse setting or situational context), or a slight increase in stress 
for prepositions and negatives that take on greater importance in this 
particular utterance. At the third level, there is even more freedom, the 
main condition being the general principle, applicable at every level, 
that a place- holder may only be assigned to a word at a given level if a 
word already has one at the next lowest level. To reflect this state of 
affairs, one could propose a condition on the reset values such that at the 
118 
first level the value is practically always 1, at the second level it is 
usually 2 but may be 3, and at the third level it may be 3, 4 or 5. 
Naturally, these values are only applicable to shorter sentences, and 
would need to be set higher, especially at the higher level (which would 
also have a wider spread of permissible reset values) for more complicated 
utterances. 
This proposed algorithm is intended purely as part of a formal 
description; no claims at all are made for psychological reality. The 
algorithm is based on the notion that it is necessary to take into account 
not merely the overall semantic weight of a word, but also the 
relationships holding between words at each level of semantic weight, in 
order to give some sort of account of the patterns of distribution of the 
different values of [content] (corresponding to relative semantic weight) 
in utterances of varying lengths. 
3.3.6 Semantic and metrical grids 
At this point it should perhaps be noted that the 'semantic grid' is not 
completely identical in kind to an LP - type 'metrical grid'. The metrical 
grid is related to a hierarchical prosodic structure, or 'metrical tree', 
by means of a 'Relative Prominence Projection Rule' or equivalent. The 
metrical grid will be described more fully in section 3.5.: the important 
feature to note in the present connexion is that one of its functions is 
to represent relative prominence under embedding . That is, it has an 
intimate link with a previously- defined hierarchical prosodic structure, 
which in its turn is loosely liked with the (surface ) syntactic structure 
of the utterance . 
The semantic grid on the other hand has been described without 
reference to any type of previously- defined hierarchical structure, and is 
based solely on word class membership and what I have loosely referred to 
as 'speaker's intention ' . According to some recent theories of semantics, 
such as generative semantics, the semantic representation of a sentence 
may be in the form of a hierarchical structure similar to syntactic 
structure . If this is so, then there could be a case for linking semantic 
119 
structure with a 'semantic grid' in a parallel fashion to the linking of 
metrical structure with the metrical grid. However, I do not propose to 
discuss theories of semantic representation here, and so the semantic grid 
will remain defined without reference to any possible semantic structure. 
This, in fact, is the approach taken by Liberman towards defining the 
metrical grid: although the grid is intimately connected to a metrical 
tree, it is not itself such a tree structure, and can be defined in terms 
which make no reference to tree structure, i.e. as an 'ordered set of 
ordered sets'. Liberman writes; 'The primary purpose of this 
formalization we have just sketched is to make it clear that the notion of 
a METRICAL GRID can be defined in a way which does not make it a tree 
stucture (i.e~ it is not necessarily 'rooted', no constituent structure is 
established, etc.). The particular kind of formalization we have chosen (a 
mapping among elements of ordered sets) is simply an attempt to render 
formally the intuition of hierarchically- related periodicities.' (L:186) 
The semantic grid is therefore similar to the metrical grid in that it 
is not a tree structure, though capable of being related to one, and can be 
defined in terms which do not presuppose such a tree structure. Also, like 
the metrical grid, the semantic grid is intended as a formal means of 
representing 'hierarchically- related periodicities'. In the case of 
semantics, this refers to the phenomenon whereby words that are 'strongest' 
(i.e. have greater semantic weight) occur less frequently and are evenly 
distributed in the sentence. The nature of 'rhythm' is still far from 
settled, but one could see it in very general terms as a repetition in time 
of units that are (or tend towards being) equivalent in length, the 
boundaries between such units being signalled in a consistent fashion. If 
one takes this view of rhythm, then the semantic as well as the metrical 
representation of the utterance could be described as rhythmical, in view 
of the evenness of distribution of semantically important elements. 
120 
3 .3.1 Some advantages of this type of analysis 
3.3.1.1 Unitary treatment of anaphoric destressing and non lex ical word s 
One advantage of an analysis that incorporates semantic considerations 
is the fact that there can be a unitary treatment of anaphoric destressing 
and nonlexical words. In assigning both nonlexical words and 
anaphorically de stressed words the same (zero) value of [content], the 
claim being made is that an anaphorically destressed word is a lexical 
word reduced to the status of a nonlexical word because of the context of 
the particular utterance. Such destressed words refer to objects, etc., 
that have already been mentioned, or which are in some sense present in the 
minds of both speaker and hearer. The same could be said of many 
nonlexical words, such as pronouns, which are only interpretable if one 
knows the particular object in the real world that is to be taken as the 
referent of 'he', 'they', etc., in the particular utterance. That this is so 
is indicated by the common rejoinder, 'Who's we?', requesting an 
identification of the persons characterised as 'we' when this has not been 
made sufficiently clear. (Other nonlexical words do not even have this 
indirect relation to the real world , and ex ist solely in the language 
system: e.g. articles, particles, auxiliary verbs.) So there would seem to 
be some support for grouping nonlexical words together with anaphorically 
destressed words, and this is done in the proposed analysis by denying 
them even the first degree of [contentJ. Also, on the phonological level, 
both these types of words, unlike lexical words, are likely to appear with 
reduced vowels and will not be intonationally prominent. 
3 .3.1.2 Different functioning of lexical and nonlexical words 
Another difference between nonlexical and lexical words, brought out by 
this type of analysis, is seen in utterances where a nonlexical word is 
emphasised for a particular purpose. If a lexical word is given such 
'contrasti ve' or 'emphatic' stress, what is focussed on is an object, action, 
characteristic, relationship, etc., that is seen as ex isting in the real 
world. On the other hand, when a nonlexical word is given this type of 
121 
stress (and, unlike lexical words, it cannot be stressed without being 
'contrasti ve' or 'emphatic'), then what is focussed on is not something seen 
as existing in the real world, but something closer to a logical operator, 
a more abstract entity expressing logical relationships between other 
entities without itself having any independent value . The following is an 
example of the use of stressed nonlexical words: -
"'You ARE Zaphod Beeblebrox?' it squeaked. 
'Yeah,' said Zaphod, 'but don't shout it out or they'll all want one.' 
'THE Zaphod Beeblebrox?' 
'No, just A Zaphod Beeblebrox, didn't you hear I come in six packs?'" 
(Adams 1980 :37 ) 
In the first line of this example, the copula receives stress, even 
though it is a nonlex ical word. This stress is of the emphatic type, 
rather than the contrastive. Contrastive stress points out an explicit 
anti thesis between two particular words, while emphatic stress makes a 
distinction between a particular word and any other word which could have 
occurred at that point - one might characterise their domains of 
operation as syntagmatic and paradigmatic respectively. In the case of 
the emphasised 'ARE' in the first line of the example, what is being 
focussed upon is the functio.n of the copula: the function of establishing 
identity of reference (when positive) between two stated arguments. The 
fact that the overall utterance functions as a question (with rising 
intonation, symbolised in print by a question mark), means that what is 
being questioned is the validity of identifying the 'you' with the referent 
of 'Zaphod Beeblebrox'. The focus is not on one or both of the arguments, 
but upon the logical operation of expressing identity between two or more 
arguments. If this type of stress (i.e. 'emphatic') had been on a lexical 
word, the focus would have been not on a logical relation but on an object, 
attribute, action, etc., in the real world. 
The second stressed nonlexical word in the example is 'THE', and this 
likewise is a case of emphatic stress, asserting the occurrence of the 
definite article rather than any other word which could have appeared at 
this point. The function of the definite article is to indicate 
definiteness of reference, so that the following noun is taken to refer to 
a particular entity (where singular) in the real world, known to both 
122 
speaker and hearer. The utterance in this case functions as a question, 
and the overall effect is to question the proposition that the entity 
claiming to be Zaphod Beeblebrox is in fact the particular (and well-
known) being of that name, known to both speaker and hearer. Were the 
proper name, and not the definite article, to receive emphatic stress in 
this utterance, the effect would be quite different. The effect would 
then be to question the proposition that the entity claiming the name 
'Zaphod Beeblebrox' was in fact entitled to the name in the first place; 
that is, similarly to the first line of the passage, what is being 
questioned is the validity of identifying the entity addressed with the 
entity known as 'Zaphod Beeblebrox'. As in the first line, this 
questioning can be done explicitly by using an emphatically stressed 
copula; but it can also be done implicitly by emphatically stressing the 
proper name itself, since a name or noun, being lexical, makes implicit 
reference to an object in the world whether it is stressed or not. A 
nonlexical word, on the other hand, makes no such reference independently, 
and so the effect of emphatic stress on 'the' is to focus on its function 
as indicator of definiteness, not on the identification of the hearer with 
the named entity. In other words, the speaker does not question that the 
hearer can correctly be designated 'Zaphod Beeblebrox'; he is merely 
asking whether a relationship of definiteness of reference holds between 
this Zaphod Beeblebrox and the well - known being of the same name. Thus 
lexical and nonlexical words behave in a different manner under emphatic 
stress, because the nonlexical word has no inherent property of picking 
out a certain object, action, etc. (or a set of such objects, actions, etc.) 
in the real world. The property which is in fact possessed by this kind of 
nonlexical word is the property of indicating logical or abstract 
relations between lexical words. 
express abstract relations, are 
information for full interpretation. 
Even pronouns, which do not merely 
nevertheless dependent on other 
The third stressed nonlex ical word in the passage is 'a'. This is given 
contrastive stress, as the speaker wishes to make an explicit antithesis 
between this word and the preceding stressed 'the'. The function of the 
indefinite article is to indicate indefiniteness of reference - that is, 
an identity of reference with a named set of entities is asserted, but 
there is no clue given as to correspondence with a particular member of 
123 
that named set. In this utterance, what the speaker is emphasising is this 
property of indefiniteness; he is making no statement at all about 
identity of reference. The explanatory rhetorical question at the end of 
the passage confirms both that he is not questioning the identity between 
himself and the named set of entities ( hence the use of 'I' to refer to the 
set designated 'Zaphod Beeblebrox ') and also that what he is denying is the 
validity of picking out a particular member of that set: the question 
makes it plain that he sees the set as consisting of more than one member, 
and that he himself, though a member of that set, is not further specified 
in terms of definiteness of reference. 
The point of this example has been to show that there are important 
differences between lexical and nonlexical words, which must be accounted 
for by any theory which includes some consideration of semantics. The 
analysis that has been put forward here does indeed make the distinction, 
in that nonlexical words are nearly always [0 contentJ, while lexical 
words nearly always take a positive value of [contentJ. This distinction 
is based on aspects of language use which are related not to structure but 
to word class; it corresponds to the first level of the semantic grid, 
where the primary distinction is made between words that can take some 
value of [contentJ and words which can only be [0 contentJ. Subsequent 
levels are increasingly less dependent on word class, and more dependent 
on semantic weight relative to other words in the utterance. Thus there 
is room for considerations of both relative and inherent semantic content 
in the analysis proposed here. The formulation in terms of a semantic 
grid enables the relationship between inherent and relati ve aspects of 
semantic content to be characterised in a purely formal way that takes due 
account of both aspects. 
3 .3.8 [contentJ and the prosodic representation 
The end product of the semantic grid is a series of values of [contentJ, 
one for each prosodic word. These can be transferred to the full prosodic 
representation, forming a kind of 'semantic level' as in the following 
example, where the values of [contentJ were obtained from the grid at the 
end of section 3.3.3 .: 
124 
w w W LV w IV W 
2 2 0 2 2 3 
I [ I ~ I I I 
2 L L Lw L s L L L 
I I I' 1\ 1\ I 1\ /\ 
0' 0' 0' ~ ow os ow ~ ~ ow os ow 
+ + + + + + + + 
John gave the in for ma tion to Su san's un cle 
As a general rule, the higher the value of [content] assigned to a word, 
the more likely that word is to be metrically 'strong' at the phrasal 
level. No absolute rules are given, since stress and intonational 
phenomena cannot be characterised in terms of absolute values, being 
extremely flexible for more direct expression of the speaker's 
'communicative intent'. It is safe to say, however, that a [0 content] word 
will always be 'weak', while a [3 content] word will be 'strong', at least at 
the first level of phrasal stress. In fact these two principles can be 
seen as general rules applying to all metrical trees. The value of 
[content] is also important in connexion with Selkirk's 'Monosyllable Rule' 
(see start of section 3.4.5J. Under normal circumstances, the values of 
[content] are used to determine whether the word is 'strong' or 'weak' at 
the first level of phrasal stress, as outlined at the start of section3.44. 
3.3.9 The need to take account of semantics 
The greatest difference between Liberman's system and the analysis 
presented here is that the latter makes provision for semantic 
considerations and integrates them explicitly into the full metrical 
structure. Liberman's approach makes no attempt to account for semantics, 
and is restricted to a few vague references to speaker intention that are 
not developed further. In most cases, the two analyses will give 
satisfactory results, representing the metrical structure of an utterance. 
It is, however, in the case of non- standard patterns (such as contrastive 
or emphatic stress, anaphoric destressing, etc.) that the analysis proposed 
here is able to account explicitly for phenomena that the other approach 
leaves out of count . Whether my analysis accounts fully for these 
125 
phenomena is another question; the preceding has only been a rough 
outline of what a fully- developed theory along these lines would look 
like, and I have no doubt that a great deal has been left unexplained. 
Nevertheless, even at this stage, an analysis that takes account of 
semantics seems preferable to one that does not. This point was made by 
Bolinger, who wrote: 'The distribution of sentence accents is not 
determined by syntactic structure but by semantic and emotional 
highlighting. Syntax is relevant indirectly in that some structures are 
more likely to be highlighted than others.' (Bolinger,D. 1972:644) The 
same author also points out that semantic content cannot be reduced to a 
binary feature assigned mainly on the basis of word class (as Thompson's 
features are), when he writes (of utterances where the verb is highly 
predictable from the preceding noun); 'It is not necessary for the verb to 
be fully pred ictable from the noun; what counts is RELATIVE semantic 
weight. For this it is necessary to take account of the entire context, 
including the context of situation.' (op. cit.:635) The assignment of 
place- holders at the first level of the semantic grid on the basis of word 
class reflects the fact that some syntactic categories are more likely to 
be 'highlighted' than others, but the subsequent levels of the semantic 
grid take more account of the 'entire context', expressing relative 
semantic weight when reduced to numerical values of [contentJ. 
The analysis proposed here provides a means for accounting for 
phenomena of increase or decrease in stress under special conditions (see 
section 3.6.). As Bolinger wrote: 'The error of attributing to syntax what 
belongs to semantics comes from concentrating on the commonplace.' (op. 
ci t.:634) It is precisely through not concentrating on the commonplace 
that the proposed analysis can account for a wider range of phenomena than 
can either Thompson's or Liberman's analyses. 
126 
3.4. METRICAL STRUCTURE (PHRASAL LEVEL) 
3.4.1 Selkirk's units 
This can be dealt with more or less as LP do, assigning's' and 'w' (for 
'strong' and 'weak' respectively) to nodes of metrical structure. However, 
Selkirk makes some proposals for this level which seem to be a definite 
improvement on the original theory. 
Selkirk (1980b) recognises three types of prosodic unit of a level 
higher than that of the prosodic word, namely: the phonological phrase 
(<1», the intonational phrase (1), and the utterance (U). 
3.4.1.1 Phonological phrase 
According to Selkirk, one or more prosodic words ('w' units) may form a 
phonological phrase, the order of nodes dominated by the <!> being w-s. The 
length of a <!> is optional, as is its precise constituency in terms of 
number of w units. Selkirk introduces the Rhythm Rule, which adjusts 
metrical structure to avoid stress clashes, and the Monosyllable Rule, 
which reduces nonlexical words to the status of weak syllable from the 
status of weak W uni t. She writes: 'There is abundant evidence that a 
weak monosyllabic non- lexical item will not reduce to ~ [syllable] unless 
it is weak with respect to a strong CONTAINED WITHIN THE SAME <1>.' (Selkirk 
1980b:19) She also writes that her 'Rhythm Rule' likewise operates only 
within the domain of the <I> - it is blocked by the boundary between subject 
and verb phrase. She gives examples from French also, showing that the 
segmental phenomenon of liaison operates only within a phonological 
phrase, and writes, 'What we are calling the phonological phrase is thus 
the privileged domain of two rules of English which apply to and modify 
prosodic structure. In other languages such as French and Modern Greek 
there is evidence from rules of the SEGMENTAL phonology that what we 
define as the phonological phrase constitutes a special domain.' (op. 
127 
I 
I 
cit.:20) The principles she gives as governing the internal structure of 
the phonological phrase refer directly to the syntax of the sentence. 
There are two such principles regarding the constituency of the ~, as 
follows: 
'i) An item which is the specifier of a syntactic phrase joins with the 
head of the phrase. 
ii) An item belonging to a 'non-lexical' category .... such as Det, Prep, 
Comp, Verb aux , Conjunction, joins with its sister constituent.' (op. cit.:15) 
Within the ~, Selkirk specifies prominence relations by what is 
essentially the LP formulation of the Nuclear Stress Rule: 
'Given the two sister nodes of prosodic structure [N 1 N2] within ~, N2 
is ~ (and N1 hence weak),' (op. cit.:18) 
However, Selkirk's analysis has no way of explicitly characterising a 
nonlexical word. This contrasts with the proposed analysis, where 
nonlex ical words are those marked [0 content] (originally, at least). 
This assigning of [content] values depends on a list of the word classes 
that may receive a place- holder on the first l evel of the semantic grid. 
Thus the proposed analysis is explicit where Selkirk's is vague. 
3.4.1.2 Intonational phrase 
Selkirk's 'intonational phrase', or 'I', is made up of one or more 
phonological phrases, freely grouped together. This hypothesis is meant 
to account for the possibilities due to variable phrasing in English: in 
a given sentence, each ~ may constitute an intonational phrase, or the 
whole utterance may be one, or else there may be several degrees in between 
these two configurations. Selkirk characterises the I as follows: 
'Consti tuency. 
structure. 
Prominence. 
The I is composed of ~ joined in a right- branching 
In I, the nodes [N 1 N2] are in the relation w/ s. 
Syntactic Domain. a ) Parentheticals, preposed adverbials, non-
restrictive relative clauses, etc., are I's. b) Otherwise, the choice 
is free.' (op. cit.:26 ) 
128 
a 
~ ____ --------------------~d 
Selkirk notes that it is also possible to view the I as being not a 
binary-branching tree, but a multiple-branching tree, with no s/w 
prominence relations defined. However, she opts for the binary-branching 
analysis, 'insofar as it is consistent with the overall Liberman and 
Prince-type approach we have been taking to prosodic structure.' (op. 
cit.:24) There is no hard evidence for this position, and indeed syntactic 
structure, on which her trees are loosely based, does not always have a 
binary-branching form. However, neither Selkirk nor Liberman give any 
substantial thought to the question of the precise relations between 
prosodic structure and syntactic structure, though it is clear in both 
works that the two types of structure are not meant to be identical. The 
prosodic structure is based on the surface syntactic structure, yet 
requirement a) of Selkirk's definition of the syntactic domain of the I 
seems to presuppose some knowledge of deep structure, or at least of 
derivational history. This is because it is necessary for the conditions 
defining well-formed I units to 'know' when certain units have been 
relocated in syntactic structure (preposed adverbials), when they derive 
from a completely different'S' in syntax (parentheticals), and their 
precise deep structure (non-restricti ve relati ve clauses, as against 
restrictive relatives). Yet Selkirk gives no hint as to how this kind of 
phenomenon is to be incorporated into the theory, and merely presents 
examples with unexplained, 'ready-made', I units. 
The examples she gives show that the boundaries between I units are the 
places where it is natural for a native speaker to insert a pause; also, 
the I units could be seen as corresponding to the 'minor tone-units' of the 
British school of suprasegmental analysis. 
3.4. 1.3 Utterance 
This is the highest-order category of prosodic structure, consisting of 
one or more intonational phrases. These are 'not obviously in any 
relation of subordination to each other (though, in the spirit of Liberman 
and Prince, may be represented as such), and .... the utterance usually 
coincides with the 'highest' sentence in syntactic structure.' (op . ci t.:27) 
Thus the 'utterance' may be seen as equivalent to the 'major tone-unit' of 
the British school of suprasegmental analysis, made up of one or more 
129 
'minor tone- units'. Selkirk has little more to say about the utterance, or 
'U' unit. 
3.4.2 Discussion 
Those prosodic units of Selkirk's that are higher than the word - the ~, 
I and U units - seem to be units of the same general kind. Their 
prominence relations are defined in the order w- s, and each uni t may be 
made up of one or more units of the next level down, in the relation 
w<~<I<U', so that it is perfectly possible for an utterance to consist in 
a single word, which would then be described as being also a ~ and an I 
unit. One could easily extend the series to include a unit made up of one 
or more utterances (a 'paragraph'?) which could be useful for describing 
phenomena such as the well-known feature of 'declination' . This refers to 
the gradual lowering of the absolute locations of the relative pitch 
levels through a longer stretch of speech such that, for example, a pitch 
which counted as 'mid' at the outset would count as 'high' at the end, the 
pi tch levels being reset at the start of a new stretch of speech. 
This feature of transitivity in Selkirk's higher - level prosodic units 
leads me to see them as being essentially the same type of unit, but 
different in degree. They seem to play a part in intonational patterns, 
rather than stress or rhythmic patterns, and are largely dependent on the 
(surface) syntactic structure. From an examination of Selkirk's examples, 
the following equivalences strike the reader: 
~ = 'contour', Le. stressed and pitch- prominent syllable, with any 
associated non- pitch-prominent syllables. The latter may be 
stressed or unstressed, as defined by the metrical grid, etc ., but 
are usually unstressed in shorter sentences. 
I _ 'minor tone- unit', Le. one or more 'contours', the last one containing 
a nuclear tone (usually non- falling in non- final I units), together 
with any non- pi tch- prominent syllables (whether stressed or 
unstressed, as defined by the metrical grid, etc.) before the first 
contour. 
U _ 'major tone- unit', Le. one or more 'minor tone- units', ending in a 
nuclear tone which is particularly linked to sentence- type (e.g., 
130 
falling tone for statements, rising tone for yes/no questions). 
It will be noted that 'prominence' in terms of these units is signalled 
in the actual utterance by pitch-prominence, not by 'stress' . A pitch-
prominent syllable will very often be stressed as well, and this could 
lead to a false equation between the two types of 'prominence'. When the 
two do not coincide, however, it is the pi tch-prominent syllable that 
counts as 'prominent' for the purposes of defining the above prosodic 
units. A stressed but non-pitch-prominent syllable, on the other hand, is 
never the DTE ('desi gnated terminal element ', or loosely 'most prominent 
syllable') of a prosodic unit. However, it may well count as stressed, 
after the application of the algorithm associated with the metrical grid 
(see section 3.3.5.1.), and would be marked with a dot or line that indicated 
only stress rather than pitch movement, in the tonetic stress mark systems 
used by O'Connor and Arnold and other British workers. 
I give examples from Selkirk (1980b:25). The preposed adverbial phrase 
in the first example, the non-restrictive relative clause in the second 
example, and the parenthetical clause in the third example, are each 
necessarily an intonational phrase. 
u 
~ 
Iw Is 
I ~ 
~ ~w ~s 
DD6 
In Pakistan, Tuesday is a holiday 
131 
u 
Tuesday, which is a weekday, is a holiday 
u 
Tuesday is, Jane said, a holiday 
One's' node in each of the two latter examples is given no designation 
in terms of type of unit. Selkirk does not mention why her sharply-
differentiated prosod ic uni ts can be dispensed with so easil y, with no 
discussion; this could support a view of the units as being different 
only in degree, not in kind, as proposed earlier. (The appended examples 
of variable phrasing are taken from Selkirk 1980b:22-23. ) 
132 
i) 
u 
U 
'I 
I 
s 
133 
, 
I 
I 
I 
ijj) 
;v) 
u 
u 
134 
~ ____ --------------------~4 
3.4_3 Intonation 
The appended examples show the variations in phrasing possible in a 
fairly long sentence, gi,ven Selkirk's prosodic units_ It would be possible 
to transcribe each example using tonetic stress marks, as follows - where 
the nuclear tone types are not the only possible ones: 
i) The -absent-minded pro'fessor has been -avidly 'reading the -latest 
bi'ography of -Marcel ,Proustll 
ii) The -absent-minded provfessor I has been -avidly 'reading the -latest 
bi 'ography of -Marcel ,Proust ll 
iii) The -absent-minded pro/,fessor I has been -avidly vreading I the 
-latest bi 'ography of -Marcel ,Proust ll 
iv) The -absent-minded pro/,fessor I has been -avidly /' reading I the -latest 
biVography I of -Marcel ,Proust!! 
Unstressed syllables at the beginning of each I are incorporated into 
the pitch movement at the end of the preceding I in most cases, but this is 
not obligatory; normally-unstressed, non-pitch-prominent nonlexical 
words such as 'has' and 'been' can become pitch-prominent (though not 
stressed, usually), when at the beginning of a major tone-unit (or 'I' 
unit), whereas neither unstressed, non-I-unit-initial syllables within a 
word, nor nonlexical monosyllables not beginning an 'I' unit, may be pitch-
prominent - at least not without sounding a little bizarre_ This raises 
the possibility of patterns such as the following, where '.' refers to an 
unstressed syllable and '. ' to a stressed syllable, a tail showing any 
pi tch glide. 
The 'absent-minded pro,fessor has been -avidl y /' reading 
• e . ... 
• • 
the 'latest biv ography of 'Marcel "Proustll 
• • 
'\ - . 
135 
Admittedly, this example exploits the maximum number of possibilities 
and sounds rather unnatural and stilted. Yet such a style of utterance is 
sometimes heard, for example from adults speaking to children or from 
certain television presenters, such as Alan Whicker. An alternative style 
for the above examples would allow the unstressed syllables in question to 
continue the preceding pitch movement, as in the following, which sounds a 
little more commonplace;-
The 'absent- minded pro"fessor f has been 'avidly "reading f 
• • • 
• • 
the 'latest biVography I of 'Marcel ,Proustll 
• 
These examples have been transcribed as composites of units made up of 
'prehead' and 'nucleus', since that is the pattern suggested by Selkirk's 
assignment of prosodic structure, where the ~ units are all fairly long . 
However, since even a single prosodic word can constitute a phonological 
phrase, an alternative analysis would be as shown in the next diagram (on 
separate pages). 
The contours in this diagram have been 'promoted' to the status of 
separate ~ units, whereas in the previous examples they merely formed part 
of larger ~ units and therefore could not be pitch-prominent. This 
example represents a slower, more deliberate style of speech, similar to 
the exaggeratedly emphatic style of the well- known phrase at the top of 
page 139, where '1" represents a high-pi tched unstressed syllable. 
136 
~ 
W 
-...J 
I", 
4>", <Ps 
w 
~ 
u 
Iw 
<Pw <Ps 
w ( , 6 
Iw Is 
<Pw <Ps cP s 
lQJ 
~ 
The ohsent - rninde.cJ p'O:fe.ssor has been avrdly reading the latest b"o~r"afh.J or Mareel Prollst 
[r. t. o. ] 
l ~ ~ ...... ".- . - - - - _. -
~ 
W 
00 
T he 'absent- minded pro/ fessor lhas been 'av"dlyVreaclinglthe'::JLal:-ed b~o:raf~lof ~;11Q rceL ,f.-oustll 
• 
• • • 
, ~. 
" 
• • ~ • 
-Ca foss ible intonation p a. tt e.rn} 
[ continue d. from frececlinj page - t o show effect of this fh rasi1791 
u 
Iw 
I 
Iw 
I 
Iw 
I 
Is 
I 
1> 1> 1> 1> 
~ ~ I I w W 
/ t f " And now I for /something I com"pletely different!! 
0 
""" 
0 
The 'I' units in this example are even smaller than those in the 
previous example, since they contain only one 'f unit each. A more normal 
style of utterance might perhaps 'demote' these 'I' units to intermediate 
or prosodic units, giving something like the following: 
~w 
~ 
And ' now 
0 
u 
I 
I 
1>w 
~ 
for I something 
• 
1>w 1>s 
I I 
CV W 
corn 'pletely ,different" 
• 
" 
In the above example, the DTE of each '1>' corresponds to a stressed 
syllable in the head, except for the last '1>', which constitutes the 
nucleus. The entire utterance is only one 'I' unit, therefore there is 
only one nuclear tone, and no perceptible pause . 
139 
This method of indicating intonational sub-units has the advantage, 
compared to the tonetic stress-mark system, that it is hierarchical; that 
is, what is realised as a head contour in one rendition of an utterance may 
become a nuclear tone in a different rendition of the same utterance, and 
only the 'metrical' system makes explicit the formal similarities between 
such units that enable the units to be realised as one or the other type of 
intonational pattern. In the tonetic stress-mark system, there is no 
formal similarity in definition between a head unit and a nucleus, and 
consequently such phenomena as 'variable phrasing' cannot be accounted for, 
the system being useful mainly for describing the one most common or 
expected type of phrasing. This is quite adequate for most purposes, and 
indeed is preferable in cases where all that is needed is a quick and 
convenient transcription system, but the proposed system seems more 
theoretically satisfying. 
It would be possible, given a tonetic stress-mark system, to formulate a 
rule allowing the nucleus to be shifted to any syllable bearing a tonetic 
stress mark. However, this approach would be unable to account for the 
free use made in everyday speech of the various possibilities of phrasing, 
since the rule concerns only the nucleus. Also, the stress marks do not 
make explicit the structural similarity of the units in question, and thus 
such a rule would have no obvious motivation. The proposed analysis, then, 
while not so convenient for purposes of transcription, provides a fuller 
and better-motivated theoretical description. 
140 
3 .4.4 Building up the tree 
Above the level of the prosodic word, metrical structure is defined, at 
the lowest level, on the basis of each word's [content] value. Words that 
are [0 content] are invariably weak; words that are [1 content] are nearly 
al ways weak. Word s which are [3 content] are strong except in a few 
abnormal cases, while words that are [2 content] may be weak or strong 
according to context. 
The basic ordering of nodes is w- s, as in the formulations of L, LP, and 
Selkirk for structure above the word level. The bracketing is loosely 
based upon syntactic surface structure wherever possible, though the 
metrical structure is by no means the same thing as the syntactic 
structure of an utterance. The main insight behind using the [content] 
values in this way is the view that the higher the value for [content], the 
more likely that word is to be strong; there are no absolute values in 
this approach, since 'prominence' is crucially dependent upon context. If 
a normally [0 content] word becomes stressed (e.g., for reasons of 
contrast), it then takes some positive value of [content] (usually 3) to 
reflect its greater semantic weight, and it is defined as a relatively 
strong word in the metrical tree and grid. Where the word with highest 
[content] value is not the last lexical word in the utterance, an 
anomalous bracketing order of s- w will be necessary at some point in the 
tree, and there will be a condition that any material following it cannot 
form a separate '<p' unit, since the following syllables (even if they 
contain a stressed syllable) cannot be pitch- prominent. Given this 
condition, one can state a common definition of the nucleus that is 
applicable both to normal and to abnormal nucleus position: the start of 
the nuclear tone is located on the DTE of the last <p unit in the 
intonational phrase. This generalisation cannot be stated at all in the 
tonetic stress- mark system, which is unable to define units where only one 
syllable is both stressed and pitch-prominent - that is, phonological 
phrases. This is another area where the proposed analysis seems more 
satisfactory. 
141 
3.4.5 Selkirk's Monosyllable Rule 
One of the two rules having the phonological phrase as their domain, 
the 'Monosyllable Rule', is described by Selkirk as follows: -
, In earlier discussions, this rule was seen as one which destressed 
monosyllabic words belonging to non- lexical categories, when they appeared 
in certain syntactic contexts. Given the theory of prosodic structure now 
being entertained, the rule can be given a simpler •.. formulation: 
Monosyllable Rule 
~ ---> O'"w ,if W dominates a non- lexical item. 
0'" 
The rule says that a monosyllabic prosodic word ~ is 'deworded' (and hence 
'defooted') if it is weak and corresponds to a non- lexical item in 
syntactic structure.' (Selkirk 1980b:19) 
The result of applying this rule to word's such as 'the', 'has', 'been', 
'of', etc., is that these words may undergo vowel reduction 'and other such 
rules which apply only to weak syllables.' (loc. cit.) Under Selkir k's 
analysis, there is no way of indicating whether or not a word corresponds 
to a nonlexical item. Under the proposed analysis, the condition on the 
rule can be stated as I if w is [0 content) I, which amounts to the same 
thing but with one important consequence: by the principles stated 
earlier, [0 content) words can only ever be weak, and so this aspect of the 
node need not be specified in a rule stating only that the word would need 
to be [0 content). Also, vowels which are [ - full) are always part of a 
weak 0'" unit (syllable), while [+full) vowels forming part of a weak 
syllable are very likely to reduce to [ - full], especially at a faster 
tempo. Thus Selkirk's rule, condition, and subsequent segmental process of 
vowel reduction can all be subsumed into one process, making use of units 
and features already shown to be necessar~ and without having to resort 
to conditions peculiar to this rule . Also, Selkirk has no method of 
characterising reduction to schwa, or of linking this schwa with original 
schwa in other words; but this can be done by the feature [±full). 
142 
3 .4.5.1 A reformula,tion of the "Monosyllable Rule t 
w 
[0 content] 
~ ---> ~ (or sometimes ~w) 
[ - full ] [+full ] 
The above is an attempt to restate Selkirk's Monosyllable Rule in the 
terms of the proposed analysis, as described above. The bracketed 
alternative realisation of the weak syllable is meant to cover the few 
cases where the vowel is not reduced entirely to schwa. Although one 
cannot state this rule in absolute terms, since not all vowels reduce to 
schwa under these circumstances, it is still possible to make a statement 
of probability, indicating that [ - full] is the most likely, or I default' 
value of [±full]. This reanalysis of the rule gives a natural explanation 
of the process which is not available under Selkirk's system - namely, 
that it applies only to words with no semantic weight [2] and that it 
causes reduction in prosodic status leading to segmental vowel reduction 
in most cases. Vowel reduction is a phenomenon that can be accounted for 
under this theory, but not under Selkirk's. 
Selkirk also observes: I Note that the bisyllabic about, though a fi) w 
which corresponds to a non- lexical item, does not reduce [Le. is not 
subject to this rule].' (Selkirk 1980b:19) Selkirk's system does not 
explain what it is about being a bisyllable that prevents a word from 
reducing when it is in a position to do so (i.e. it is a Ww corresponding to 
a nonlexical item); whereas under the proposed system, 'about', a 
preposition, would be marked as [1 content]. This means that it would 
nearly always be a weak prosodic word. Since [1 content] is very close to 
[0 content], there would be some tendency for the word to be reduced, being 
of relati vely little importance semantically. If this were to happen, 
only the weak syllable of its bisyllabic foot would reduce to schwa. 
[2] These are not always nonlexical words, but Selkirk's rule makes it 
seem so. 
143 
In Selkirk's system, words such as 'has', 'been', etc. differ only in 
number of syllables from words like 'about'; whereas under the proposed 
system, values of [content] constitute the vital difference between words 
which always reduce an'd those which may remain unreduced, when both kinds 
of word are weak in metrical structure. 
3.4.5.2 Dewording 
In the case of [1 content] words, reduction may be of a different kind . 
Whereas the 'Monosyllable Rule' refers only to [0 content] words and 
involves both 'defooting' and 'dewording', words which are [1 content] 
could simply be 'deworded' but not 'defooted' - a less severe reduction. 
This process would be optional, dependent on such things as tempo of 
utterance and speaker's intention . A tentative statement of the rule is 
as follows: 
Dewording (optional) 
C;; w 
[1 content] 
--> 
[1 content] 
It will be noted that this rule applies only to wor ds that ar e weak and 
composed of only one foot; in this much it is identical to the 
Monosyllable Rule. The foot may contain one, two, or three syllables, and 
the word is [1 content] . The rule is more likely to apply, the fewer the 
number of syllables in the foot. The rule is applicable to polysyllables 
since it retains the unit of the foot, within which the prominence 
relations are usually in the order s- w. Since the rule concerns only 
word s containing a single foot, this means that within the Ww units in 
question, any prominence relations will mostly be in the order s - w. Above 
the ww' they will nearly always be in the order w- s. Therefore the foot 
cannot be dispensed with as well as the word, in polysyllables, since there 
is a need for a unit to mark the point where the basis for assi gning 'w' and 
's' to nodes is changed. The point does not arise for monosyllables, which 
can therefore be 'defooted' as well as 'deworded' . 
144 
3 .4.5.3 Dewording needed for [1 content] words 
If these rules are viewed as mere formalism, it may be objected that it 
is equally possible, in . [1 content] words, for 'defooting' alone to take 
place, rather than 'dewording', since there would still be a unit (the 
single- footed word) to mark the boundary between levels having different 
principles of lW' and's' assignment. But such an objection would ignore 
the hierarchical nature of the units, whereby a Wmust contain at least one 
2 , and a 2 must contain one or more er uni ts (underlyingly, at least). Even 
after the application of either of the rules described above, the newly-
reduced unit would not constitute the sole daughter of a unit two 'levels' 
higher than itself, since it will always constitute the lW' member of a w- s 
pair. Thus the hierarchical relationship of the units is preserved . This 
would not be the case were the rule for [1 content] words one of 
'defooting' rather than 'dewording', since one or more syllables could then 
be directly dominated by a lW' unit with no intervening ':i:' unit. Such a 
position would hardly be logically tenable, since a single- footed word 'is 
a' foot, by definition, and merely erasing the '2:' symbol in the 
diagrammatic representation will not alter the fact that such a word has 
the internal structure of a stress foot and therefore is a stress foot, as 
defined by one of Selkirk's I basic foot templates ! . The same objection 
does not hold in cases where the 'Ww' unit has been 'defooted' or 'deworded' 
according to the rules proposed, since then one of two considerations will 
apply:-
i) the defooted syllable may end in a single non- tense vowel with no 
following consonant. Thus it cannot constitute a foot by any of 
Selkirk's 'foot templates ' , its original designation as such being 
due to the consideration of the syllable in its citation form only, 
when the vowel would be lengthened. The process of reduction of a 
word to a 'er ' unit in an utterance where the word i s a 'tv ' unit w w 
corresponds to the effect on that word of being in an utte r ance 
together with many other words, with at least one of which it must 
combine in order to be designated a tweak' unit; i.e . weak in 
relation to another unit. 
145 
ii) even in the case of syllables capable of constituting a foot on 
their own account (according to Selkirk's basic foot templates ), 
one finds the same restriction as with the syllables covered by 
condition i ) . That is, such syllables (or, in the case of 
dewording, feet capable of constituting a word on their own 
account) are never the sole daughters of a higher-level unit. They 
always combine with a unit of intermediate level (a W or a ~, 
respectively) which itself is capable of being the sole daughter of 
the higher-level unit that dominates them both. Something like 
this principle is seen at work in Selkirk's template for the 
I stress super foot' (where the 2S units may have varying internal 
structure) : 
stress super foot 
In this template, the final ~unit is unable to form a new ~ on its own, 
since it contains a non-tense vowel not followed by a consonant. It is 
accordingly incorporated into a higher-level unit together with a foot, 
and must always be the weak member. The 2S unit, on the other hand, is not 
only a foot in its own right, but is also capable of constituting the sole 
daughter of aW unit. This situation is parallel to that described above, 
though there is no direct equivalence because of the recognition here of a 
'super foot' unit, with no analogue at levels above that of the word. 
146 
3 .4.5.4 Disyllabic [0 content] words 
A minor problem is posed by [0 content] words (Thompson's - SALIENT) 
which are disyllabic, eg , 'because', 'become'. These will not be deworded 
and de footed by the rule for [1 content] words. Yet it is possible, in 
fast speech, for each of the syllables of the above examples to be reduced 
to schwa, exactly as if a reduction rule of some sort had applied. 
Thompson, in his summary of features, lists conjunctions and copula verbs 
under - SALIENT, but adds the following as a footnote; 'Simple one syllable 
conjunctions such as and or but are clearly - SALIENT. I am not sure about 
others lii<e since or because etc.; more data is needed before a sure 
determination can be made.' (Thompson 1980:138) It is possible that a 
disyllabic [0 content] word such as 'because' would undergo the dewording 
rule, or alternatively it could be seen as being in fact [1 content]. The 
latter view seems preferable for two reasons: 
First, 'because' could be said to have a certain degree of inherent 
semantic weight in that, like prepositions, it refers to relations between 
real - world entities (in this case, logical relations), although it makes 
no direct reference to real - world entities. Thompson's uncertainty about 
the status of 'because' etc . with respect to ±SALIENT could stem from a 
native- speaker perception of this sort of intermediate status, which is 
akin to that of prepositions and negatives. 
Secondly, it is by no means unknown for such conjunctions to be 
stressed in speech, and they are stressed more often than would be 
expected if this were merely a case of 'contrastive' or 'emphatic' stress . 
On the other hand, similarly to prepositions, when stressed they hint at a 
higher level of emphaticness overall in the utterance, however casually 
spoken, and never seem to achieve the complete lack of emphaticness found 
in a stressed lexical word. 
For these reasons, it seems best to designate 'because', 'become', etc. as 
[1 content], which makes them eligible for dewording. However, this is as 
yet only a tentative suggestion, and it may well be found that there is a 
better way of dealing with the problem. 
147 
3.4.6 Examples 
On page 149 follows a fairly long example of the workings of the 
proposed analysis, the ex'ample being adapted from Selkirk 1978:17. The 
circled units indicate the points of application of the reduction rules, 
as described earlier . This is only one of the possible phrasings of the 
sentence, and other divisions into higher - level prosodic units are also 
possible. This phrasing could be realised by the following intonational 
pattern:-
The 'absent - minded pro/fessor I has been .avidly 'reading 
• 
" 
the 'latest bi 'ography of 'Marcel ,Proust ll 
• • 
This phrasing corresponds to a rather quick and unemphatic style of 
utterance; a slower style would involve 'promoting' more ~ units to the 
status of intonational phrase, or 'minor tone- unit' . On page 150 is given 
the metrical structure, and a su ggested phrasing, of the example sentence 
'John gave the information to Susan's uncle'. Whatever the phrasing 
actually chosen by the speaker, the basic s - w relations will be the same, 
so the overall structure does not alter. 
As in the previous example, the circled units indicate the points of 
application of the reduction rules, and the intonation pattern is only one 
of several patterns that would have been possible given this phrasing (i.e. 
this precise assignment of 'I' and 'f labels to nodes higher than the 
word). The process of dewording and of defooting and dewording will be 
seen to be important later, in connexion with the 'metrical grid'. 
148 
u 
Iw 
tP ~w <Pw ~s 
-~ 
CD 
l1Jw (JJ)s 
o 2 2 o o 2 2 o 1 '2 
0- os o-w os aw ~s o-w (J c;- er 0- er ~ cr 0- os o-w o-w C) er 
+ ~ + + + + + + + + + + @ +- + ++- - + <±) + + + 
T he absel'7t- minde d professor- hos heen avidly readif1j the lal:est hio9rafhy Of .Mar-eel Pr<> u. si" 
u 
S 
/ 
<f>w ~w ~s ~w ~s 
I I I 
w w w W 
2 2 .0 2 2 3 
I I 1 7"'" I I I 2 2 A 2S 2 2 2 I I I !\ I 1\ 1\ (j" (j" (j" (j"s (j"w (j"s (j"w (j" (j"s (j"w (j"s (j"w 
+ + + + + + + + 
'John 'gave the in for /ma tion l to 'Su san's ,un cle l! 
" • • 
• ~ 
~ 
150 
3.5. THE METRICAL GRID 
3.5.1 Introduction 
The 'metrical grid' is an entirely abstract concept, first introduced in 
Liberman (1975), and elaborated upon in Liberman and Prince (1977). It is 
a method of resolving the purely hierarchical structure of the metrical 
tree into a time-bound, serial, structure, while at the same time 
preserving relative prominence of units at various levels. Al though 
Liberman, in his original formulation, used numbers as place- holders in 
the metrical grid, in order to be able to refer to each position 
explicitly, it seems more logical to follow Thompson (1980) and use a 
constant symbol as a place- holder. Thompson uses an asterisk, I will use a 
circle, but the precise nature of the symbol is of no importance. The 
reason for using a constant symbol is that i t makes explicit the important 
feature that all these grid posi tions are identical in kind, and differ 
only in degree, according to the level where they appear. 
As Liberman and Prince write, ' ••• the "degree of stress" of a given 
syllable is represented by the height of the column of marks that stands 
over it.' (LP:312) Also: 'Elements are metrically adjacent if they are on 
the same level and no other elements of that level intervene between them; 
adjacent elements are metrically alternating if, in the next lower level, 
the elements corresponding to them (if any) are not adjacent; adjacent 
elements are metrically clashing if their counterparts one level down are 
adj acent.' (LP:314) 
This framework allows LP to describe the operation of the Rhythm Rule, 
which resolves clashing stresses by swapping a pair of w/s nodes, so that 
the stress of the first word is shifted from the final (or penultimate) 
syllable to a previous syllable in the word . The metrical grid provides a 
clear formalisation of the prominence relations at various levels, and 
from it one may pick out the stressed (and secondary- stressed) syllables, 
151 
leaving matters of pi tch- prominence to the intonational/metrical tree. 
LP argue for the metrical grid as an entity distinct from the metrical 
tree, wri ting; 
'Representing such grids as trees, al though possible, requires us to 
define rows and columns deri vati vely, and also requires the 
imposi tion of constituent- structure relations that will have no 
relevance to our present purposes. Therefore, we choose to 
formalize such grids as, in a sense, hierarchies of intersecting 
periodici ties.' (LP:313) 
The same general principles apply to the metrical grid as were 
discussed in connex ion with the semantic grid in section 3.2. That is, the 
grid is not simply a scalar feature written in graphical terms, since the 
prominence relations within each level are of great importance. Also, a 
word defined as unstressed in the metrical grid of a long sentence may, in 
a shorter sentence where the word has the same number of 'place holders', 
become stressed due to the relative lack of stress of the other words. 
3 .5.2 Description 
In the first row of the metrical grid (under the analysis proposed 
here), every syllable containing a [+full] vowel receives a place- holder, 
while syllables containing a [ - full] vowel may be indicated by a dash. 
This is a way of representing the fact that not only do schwa and syllabic 
consonants not receive stress in this sentence, but they are never likely 
to, in this or any other sentence. This is in contrast to syllables which 
mayor may not receive at least a certain amount of stress, depending on 
context. 
In the second row of the metrical grid, a place- holder is assigned to 
all syllables that are the DTE of a stress foot - that is, to all 
monosyllabic feet, and syllables of the' O"s' kind. 
In the third row, another place- holder is assigned to all syllables 
that are the DTE of a prosodic word. 
152 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
In the fourth row, a place- holder is assigned to all syllables that are 
the DTE of a phonological phrase: in the fi fth row, to all DTE's of an 
intonational phrase: in the sixth row, to the DTE of the overall 
utterance. There is a general constraint on the grid, following from the 
hierarchical nature of prosodic units, such that a place- holder may not be 
assigned at any level higher than the first without the syllable also 
having a place- holder on the previous level. 
Liberman and Prince do not give any detail s as to the formulation of 
their metrical grid in these terms, and Selkirk does not even use the 
notion of a metrical grid, dealing only with tree structure. The method 
presented here has the advantage that it will cause different phrasings of 
the same sentence to be reflected differently in the metrical grid, to a 
minor degree. However, the grid will preserve the basic distinction 
between 'stressed' and 'unstressed' which it is in tended to represent. 
'Stressed' syllables are those that are associated with a longer column of 
place- holders than are neighbouring syllables. Particularly important 
for such comparison is the preceding syllable, rather than the following 
syllable. If the preceding syllable is associated with a l - column in the 
metrical grid, and the syllable i n question is associated with a 3- column 
or sometimes even with a 2- column, then the syllable in question is 
stressed . However, if the preceding syllable has a 4- column, and the 
syllable in question a 2- column or often a 3- column, then this syllable is 
not stressed. What is important is not any 'inherent stress' the syllable 
may have, but its stress level relative to the neighbouring syllables, so 
that a column of a given height may be interpreted as stressed or 
unstressed, according to context. 
Also important in connexion with the metrical grid is the notion of 
probability, as against certainty of occurrence. For example; if a 2-
column is flanked by l - columns, then it is probable that its syllable will 
be counted as stressed. However, this is not neccessarily so, since the 
preceding l - column may be itself preceded by a 4- column, which is even 
more likely to be stressed than the 2- column. Given that this 4- column is 
stressed, the 2- column is fairly likely to be stressed, but need not be -
the question will be decided by outside factors, such as tempo of 
153 
utterance, pi tch-prominence patterns, and any segmental modifications. [3 ] 
Thi s is the phenomenon known as 'secondary stress ' ; when a syllable is 
said to have a certain degree of stress, but less than the full amount 
possible. There is sometimes disagreement over whether such a syllable is 
stressed at all, in cases where it is not also pi tch-prominent. The 
examples in the next section may help to dispel some of this confusion. 
3.5.3 Use of the metrical grid 
3.5.3.1 Assigning [:!;stress] 
The question of whether or not a syllable is stressed could be most 
easil y approached by means of an algorithm similar to that proposed for 
the 'semantic grid' (see section 3.3.4.2.2.L This algorithm is almost 
identical to that proposed by Thompson for identifying the first syllable 
of each 'foot' (Thompson 1980:140 ) , and is as follows; 
At the start of the utterance set the threshold to 2. If the first 
column is of height 2 or greater, that syllable is stressed. If it is not, 
subtract one from the threshold and move to the next syllable. If its 
col umn is greater than (or sometimes even equal to) the threshold in 
height, that syllable is stressed; otherwise it is unstressed. On 
designating any syllable as stressed, the threshold is reset to four 
before moving on to the next syllable . The threshold value will seldom be 
less than nought, as long stretches of completely unstressed syllables are 
uncommon in English. If a column is equal to the threshold val ue in 
height, it is fairly likely to be stressed, especially when followed by one 
or more very low columns. However, it is impossible to be certain on this 
point, since factors such as tempo and speaker idiosyncracies affect it. 
[3 ] This description looks at the process from the point of view of the 
'hearer'; one could al so take the 'speaker's' point of view and say 
that if it was intended that this 2- column be stressed, the syllable 
will show modification of pi tch pattern and segmental features, and 
the overall tempo of the utterance will be slower. The phenomenon is 
not intended to be viewed as a directional process, but these 
features are to be seen as co- occurring with a stressed syllable. 
154 
An increase in tempo could be represented in the algorithm by an increase 
in the reset val ue of the threshold, so that fewer syllables will be 
counted as stressed. Conversely, a slowing-down in tempo (usually 
corresponding to greater emphaticness in style of utterance) would be 
represented by a small decrease in the threshold's reset value, so that it 
would be possible to count more syllables as stressed. 
3,5.3.2 Examples 
o 
f 
(j 
+ 
a 
metrical 0 
grid 
'" 
O"S O"w 
+ 
to le 
0 
0 
0 
0 
u 
I 
I 
2 
CiW CiW 
rable 
1>s 
I 
\JU 
3 
"'\ 2:s !\ Cis O"w CiW Cis O"w 
+ + + + 
quali fi ca tion 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
row 1: [±full ] 
row 2: DTE of 2: 
row 3: DTE of \JU 
row 4: DTE of f 
row 5: DTE of I 
row 6: DTE of U 
In example i), the first syllable of 'qualification' could be said to 
have 'secondary stress', while the fourth syllable has primary stress. The 
ab sence of other 2-col umns for some distance on ei ther side of 'qual-' 
lead s to its being counted as stressed. This is for want of a 'better' 
syllable to take the stress that is needed to break up such a long stretch 
of comparatively non-prominent syllables. It would be rare - and rather 
difficult - to produce this sentence with 'qual-' as one of a string of six 
unstressed syllables. 
155 
ii) 
0 
~ I 
(j 
the 
+ or -
0 
(or - ) 
U 
I 
2 
I 
L 
I 
(j 
right 
+ 
0 
0 
0 
0 
~ 
I 
\AI 
3 
7"" AA 
(j S O'w o-w 0-S O'w 
quali fi ca tion 
+ + t- + 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
In example ii), the syllable 'qual- ' is again associated with a 2-
column, but this time it is immediately preceded by a 4- column. A 4-column 
corresponds to a stressed syllable in all but the most exceptional cases. 
Thus the stress on 'qual-' is now not nearly as 'prominent' as it was in 
example i), and it is quite likely that it will count as completely 
unstressed. This is despite the fact that, as in U, it is a 2-column. If 
the utterance is spoken slowly, it is possible for 'qual- ' to be stressed. 
In such a case, it will cause a stress clash wi th 'right' that cannot be 
resol ved by rhythm rule (i.e ., backshifting of stress on the first word of 
the pair), because of the lack of other syllables to which to shift the 
stress. 
In example iii), given a reset value of four for the threshold, the 
syllable 'in- ' would not be counted as stressed. In example iv), the 
column for 'in-' is equal to the threshold, and so could well be stressed. 
In example v), the val ue of the threshold at 'qua- ' is equal to that for 
'in- ' in example iii). In example v), however, 'qua- ' is followed by two 1-
column syllables (as against one for 'in- I), and so is slightly more likely 
156 
iii) 
v) 
0 
! 
L 
I 
a 
+ 
u 
I 
I 
~s 
I 
Il1l 
023 
+ + + + + + 
a monthly in vi ta tion 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
u 
I 
I 
~s 
I 
Il1l 
2 3 
r ~\ L! I; 2:s 2:s 0waw~w a aw 
+ + + + + 
a higher qua li fi ca tion 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
iv) u 
I 
I 
~s 
I 
Il1l 
2 3 
+ + + + + + 
a summa ry invi ta tion 
o 0 0 0 0 0 
o 
o 
o 
o o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
vi) U 
157 
0 
I 
1: 
I 
a 
+ 
2 
I 
I 
I 
~ 
A 
as aw aw 
+ + 
a silli er 
0 0 0 
0 
0 
0 
~s 
I 
Il1l 
3 
~ A" as awaw as aw 
+ + + + 
qua li fi ca tion 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
to be counted as stressed than is the syllable 'in- ' in example iii). In 
example vi), the value of the threshold at 'qua- ' is equal to that for 'in- ' 
in example iv) - that is, equal to the 2- column on 'qua- ' and 'in- '. Since 
'qua- ' is followed by two 1- column syllables (as against one for 'in- '), it 
is even more likely that 'qua- ' will count as stressed than 'in- ', though 
'in- ' is nevertheless quite likely to count as stressed. 
vii) u 
I 
I 
A 
~w ~s 
I I 
W W 
023 
+ + + + + 
a brotherly affi li 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
'metrical grid' in numer ical val ues : 
( J marks syllables counted as stressed) 
+ 
a tion 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
In example vii), the 2- column on '- fi - ' is greater than the threshold at 
that point, and so this syllable is likely to be counted as stressed . 
It will be noted that the algorithm reduces the variable values of the 
columns of the metrical grid to plus or minus values of [±stress], 
represented in interlinear graphs by large and small dots respectively. 
This is the point at which an essentially multi - valued feature is reduced 
to a binary feature for the purposes of an actual utterance. While theory 
may require sophisticated descriptive apparatus, the more pragmatic 
requirements of practice call for clear distinctions. Since the maximal 
158 
form of distinction holds between just two elements, it is perhaps not 
surprising that the binary distinction between stressed and unstressed is 
the one used in practice. 
3.5.4 The need for the metrical grid 
Although the columns of the metrical grid are being treated as simple 
numerical values for the purposes of this algorithm, this is not meant to 
imply that the process of assigning place- holders at various levels is 
redundant. Far from it: the metrical grid, formulated in terms of levels 
as well as in terms of the columns necessary for the algorithm, is vital 
for the specification of such things as stress clashing and the rhythm 
rule (which relieves stress clashes where possible). It is also important 
in that it preserves the prominence relations of units embedded inside 
higher- level units. Perhaps most tellingly of all, it is not clear how the 
numerical values would be arrived at independently of the grid. It is 
true that a fairly crude algorithm has been suggested (without conviction) 
by Liberman and Prince, but this is unsatisfactory, as will be seen . The 
algori thm suggested by LP is as follows, where the number 
correspond to the highest degree of stress : 
would 
'If we wished to mimic closely the numerology of previous theories, 
we could make use of the following definition: 
(12) If a terminal node ~ is labelled ~, its stress number is equal to 
the number of nodes that dominate it, plus one. If a terminal node t 
is labelled~, its stress number is equal to the number of nodes that 
dominate the lowest ~ dominating ~, plus one.' (LP:259) 
Liberman and Prince point out that this algorithm 
'simply expresses the fact that the information that goes into the 
results of the numerological cycle is also present in the annotated 
tree of the relational theory. There is nothing inherent in the 
relational method of representation that would lead one to the 
particular rank- ordering of terminals implied by (12), as expressing 
the notion "degree of stress". The relational representation says, 
simply, that at a given level one subconstituent is stronger than 
the other.' (loc. cit.) 
However, they do not mention that not only is this algorithm 
unnecessary, but it can also lead to incorrect results, due to 'stressed' 
159 
words being embedded more deeply in the metrical structure than are 
unstressed word s, as is seen in the following example;-
i) R 
W S 
s 
I'A s ~ 
w w w s w w s 
a colourful little bird was singing loudly 
3 4 5 2 3 4 
ii) R 
w 
~ 
W S 
~ ~ 
W S W S w s s 
a colourful little bird was singing loudly 
4 3 4 2 4 3 
These examples are drawn out in the style of LP, though without marking 
values for their feature [±stressJ. The numbers are derived by the 
algori thm quoted earl ier. Example ii ) has undergone rebracketing by a 
process which L sees as akin to ' cliticization' ( though no word boundaries 
are deleted). This is the process by which 'certain non-lexical words 
become attached to lexical words in their vicinity' (L:110 ) . Even when 
this adjustment has been made, however, the result is not totally 
satisfactory. Admittedly, example ii) is more satisfactory than example 
i) ( the same sentence before rebracketing ) , where nonlex ical, normally 
unstressed word s 'a' and 'was' seem to have more stress than lex ical word s 
'colourful', 'little', and 'singing'. However, the adjusted structure of ii ) 
still assigns the same stress level to the two nonlexical words as to the 
lexical word 'little', which usually has at least a certain degree of 
stress. No explanation is offered for this effect, and so it seems LP are 
wise to reject this type of algorithm. The following example shows the 
same sentence analysed according to the system proposed here: 
160 
iii) u 
s 
~ 
~w ~s 
1 1 
0 2 2 3 0 2 3 
I 
I 
I I I I 
I 
L' L' 
~ f\ z 2: 2: Z L r 1\ I I 1\ (j O's (jw (jw (js O'w (j 0' O's (jw er O'w 
+ + + + + + + + + 
a colourful little bird was singing loudly 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 
0 
a possible style of utterance would be: 
a 'colourful ·little ",bird 1 was 'singing ,loudly 11 
The metrical grid is therefore a vital part of the total 
r epresentation. It provides the basis for defining stressed syllables and 
stress clashes . The collapsing of the many different column heights into 
plus and minus values of [±stressJ is carried out by a simple algorithm 
that is, however, flexible enough to be able to account for the results of 
changes in overall tempo . For all practical purposes, i n the actual use of 
language, syllables are either stressed or unstressed, and so such a 
'collapsing' process is necessary. However, there are cases when it is 
unclear whether or not a particular syllable is stressed; such cases can 
be characterised as occasions when either: 
i ) the column height is merely equal to the threshold value at that point, 
or 
161 
ii) if the column height is (a little) greater than the threshold value at 
that point, there is a maximum of one column of height one or nil after the 
syllable and immediately before a column higher than that of the given 
syllable (see end of section 3.5,3.). 
The complete representation is a composite of semantic, syntactic, 
metrical, and segmental phonolog ical considerations. As such, it is an 
attempt to give a fuller account of stress in English than is possible 
using only one or two of these aspects: semantic (Thompson), syntactic 
(Chomsky and Halle, and many others), metrical (L, LP, and Selkirk), 
segmental phonological (Chomsky and Halle: [±stress] assigned to vowels). 
The following is an example of a complete representation. 
iv) u 
S A ~w ~s ~w ~w ~s 
crwA I 
uu uu UUs uu uu 
2 2 0 2 1 2 3 
I \ I 7""" I I I 2: 2: "Z A 2:s 2: 2: 2: I \ \ 1\ I 1\ 1\ ~ ~ ~ ~s O"W O"s ~w 0" O"S ~w O"s ~w 
+ + + + + + + + 
John ~ave the in for ma tion to Su san's un cle 
0 0 
" 
co 
" 
.. c- o 
0 0 0 0 0 C> (' 
0 0 () 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
a possible intonation pattern for this phrasing is: 
'John 'gave the 'infor/mation I to 'Susan's ,uncle 11 
162 
The metrical grid is then converted to values of [±stress] for each 
syllable, using the algorithm described previously. This algorithm is 
almost identical to Thompson's, which runs as follows:-
'Set the threshold at 2. Proceeding left to right through the 
constituent grid, at each syllable 
1) if the associated col umn is a 4-col umn, start a foot with thi s 
syllable, set the threshold at 4, and carry on. 
2) otherwise if the height of the column is greater than or equal 
to the threshold, and there is a next column whose height is less 
than the height of this one, either start a foot with this syllable, 
set the threshold at 4 and carry on, or else decrease the threshold 
by 1 and carry on. Starting a foot is preferred if the col umn 
height is greater than the threshold. 
3) otherwise decrease the threshold by one and carry on.' 
(Thompson 1980:140) 
Thompson, however, does not mention the possibility of adjusting the 
reset value to correspond to changes in tempo. Neither does he mention 
the situation where the smaller column after the given syllable precedes a 
column larger than that of the given syllable. In such a case, it is very 
likely that the given syllable will not count as stressed, especially if 
the overall tempo is fairly fast, corresponding to a higher reset value of 
the threshold. 
3.5.5 Stress shifting 
Stress shifting, or the 'thirteen men' phenomenon as it is sometimes 
called, is a very common feature of English. Many examples of different 
kinds are given in Bolinger (1965) . 
/ 
clear-cut 
.-
Constitution 
" cast aside 
he struck ou't 
" (he was outraged! 
" thirteen 
A few examples follow: 
.-
a clear-cut problem 
/ 
the Constitution forbids it 
/ 
then cast aside your fears 
/ 
he struck out twice 
an o~trage) 
" thirteen men 
Bolinger points out that this backshifting is general among all 'two-
word verbs' as he calls them - Le. verb with post-position. But it is 
seen also in nouns and adjectives of various kinds, and so does not seem to 
163 
be tied directly to syntactic considerations. 
According to Bolinger, these shifts ' •••• apparently can only occur when 
the syllable to which the shift takes place is already long.' (Bolinger 
1965:160) This agrees with condition number 2 of LP's rule of 'Iambic 
Reversal', formulated to avoid clashing stresses (LP:319) : 
/\ 
w S 
2 
Cond i tions: 
'Iambic Reversal (optional) 
/\ 
---> S W 
2 
1. Constituent 2 does not contain the designated 
terminal element of an intonational phrase. 
2. Constituent 1 is not an unstressed syllable.' 
This condition reflects the general constraint that no'S' node may 
directly dominate a [-stress] element in Liberman's formulation. Under 
the proposed system, the constraint would be that no [-full] vowel may be 
the DTE of a stress foot: i.e. it will only be a 'O'w' unit. 
Bol inger' s conclusion has significant implications for the initial 
assignment of metrical structure. He wri tes;-
'stress patterns are apt to congeal in the way position in the 
sentence may predispose them, which means that nouns and adjectives 
will tend to be forestressed, verbs to be endstressed, and 
ultimately, in 
of posi tion. 
crystallizing 
many cases, to carry this stress with them regardless 
The influence of the major sentence accents in 
the stress in the first place has been overlooked 
mainly because of our reliance on citation forms, which has fixed in 
our minds the conviction that we ought to be able to find 'the' 
stress pattern of every lexeme. Since citation forms coincide, in 
their stresses, with what we find at the END of an utterance, the 
almost equally potent initial accent has not been given its due.' 
(Bolinger 1965:164) 
For some words at least, it could be a fallacy to assume that there is 
only one stress pattern possible. The citation form of a word, as Bolinger 
observes, provides the motivation for the convenient fiction that the word 
is stressed in a particular way, which subsequently must be al tered by 
rhythm rule in very many cases. The citation forms of some words, in fact, 
would contravene Selkirk's rules of prominence relations within the word 
(see end of section 3.2.2.), According to her rules, given a pair of sister 
164 
nodes, the second is strong if and only if it branches. This rule is 
broken in the ci ta tion forms of word s such as the following; 
i) IIU ii) IIU iii) IIU ~ /\ /~ 
L' 
" 
~w ~.r ~w ~s (s\ I I I I cr crw er cr cr cr cr 
+ + + + + + 
un der neath can teen un known 
However, in contex t, the rhythm rule operates to backshi ft the stress in 
words such as this, where a preceding syllable is capable of taking stress 
(Le. it is [+full]). In such cases, the shifted form conforms to Selkirk's 
rule, which is essentially the 'Lex ical Category Prominence Rule' of 
Liberman and Prince. In the following examples, the effects of 
backshifting are shown by arrows. 
iv) U v) u vi) u I I I I I I ~ ~ ~ ~w ~s ~w ~s ~w ~s 
I ~w, I I I , IIU III IIU IIU IIU 
1 0 3 2 3 2 3 1\ I 1\ 1\ J /\ /\ 2! f:\ J\~ 1: 2:s t Iq f41s t I I 
O:s crw er cr cr cr cr cr crs crw erw er cr cr cr 
+ + + + + + + + + + + + 
underneath the arches canteen cutle ry unknown a gent 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
~1 <--- [ 0 ~J~{ 0 ~1~ [ 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
165 
It appears that backshifting of stress can be optional in some cases, 
such as those where one or more syllables intervene between the 
(unshifted) stressed syllable of a word and a following stressed syllable. 
It is possible for su'ch cases to be produced without backshifting, but 
they then sound somewhat awkward and unnatural, particularly if there are 
only a few intervening syllables. In near 1 y ever y case the stress 
undergoes backshifting. Further examples follow. 
o o 2 o 3 
z Z L Ls I I I I 
0' 0' 0' O's O'w er 0' 0' 0' 
+ + + + + + + + 
it was placed underneath a newspaper 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
O'w 
0 
viii) U 
I 
I 
s 
~ 
~w ~s 
I I 
I.Ul I.Ul 
023 
er O's O'w er 0'\\1 O'w er 
+ + + + + 
he abso lutely agrees 
o 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
Examples vii) - x) have had the stress backshifted, as indicated by the 
circled's' and 'w' symbols. In vii) and ix) it would be possible to 
produce a version without backshifting. But this would sound most 
unnatural, probably necessitating an intonational break immediately after 
stressed '-neath' (which does not usually happen with unstressed ' - neath'). 
In viii) and x) a non- backshifted version would be more acceptable, since 
the greater number of syllables between the two stresses in such a case 
makes for greater evenness in the rhythm. Thus there is more scope for 
166 
ix) 
0 0 
I I 
1: 1: 
I l 
C1 C1 
+ + 
it was 
0 0 
2 
I 
L 
I 
C1 
+ 
u 
I 
I 
right 
0 
0 
0 
0 
~w ~s 
I i\ IDl ~ illS 
0 3 
/\ I T\·w 
~ rf,sf\ 
C1S crw C1 er C1 C1 C1W 
+ + + + + -
underneath a newspa per 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
variation in cases such as viii) and x), while in the other cases 
backshifting is almost compulsory. This points to a gradual scale of 
vulnerabil i ty to stress shi fting among word s, depending on contex t but 
also on the make- up of each word . Words such as 'absolutely' have a final 
unstressed syllable already present as a 'buffer', while words such as 
'underneath' do not. When the following word also contains the 'buffer' of 
an initial unstressed syllable, e .g. 'agree', then it is even more likely 
that the rhythm rule will fail to appl~ since a more evenly- distributed 
effect can be obtained by retaining the citation form. As Bolinger 
writes: 'Stability of stress pattern seems to vary all along the scale.' 
(Bolinger, 1965 : 162, footnote) 
In examples ix) and x), the stress shift actually causes a new clash 
between the shi fted stress and the preced ing stressed monosyllable. In 
such cases, it is very likely that the stress shift backwards will not 
occur. If it does occur, there will probably be a pause between the 
clashing stresses, or else tbe first of the two clashing stressed 
167 
x) 
~w 
~ ~ws 
0 2 
I 
z L 
I I (j (j 
+ + 
the boss 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
+ 
u 
I 
I 
ab 
0 
0 
0 
0 
so 
s 
~ 
~w ~S 
I I 
2 3 
+ + + 
lu tely a grees 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
syllables will be leng thened slightly. Liberman discusses a similar 
si tuation, using the example phrase 'the anaphoric reference'. He proposes 
two al ternati ve solutions to the problem of the stress clash in this 
phrase . One solution is to backshift the stress, as in the examples given 
here, so that it shifts from '- pho- ' to 'an- '. The other solution is to add 
'additional grid elements', as in example xii). Example xi) gives the 
original form, xii) contains two ex tra lower- level elements, and xiii) 
shows backshi fting (L: 196). 
xi) 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
the anaphoric reference 
xiii ) 3 
2 2 
1 
xii) 3 3 
2 2 2 2 
1 1 
the anaphoric(0) (0) reference 
3 
2 
the anaphoric reference 
168 
Liberman describes the solution exemplified in example xii) as 
representing one way of saying the phrase. The phonetic null s are 
realised as a pause. He observes that the pragmatic effect of this 
rendition seems to be t6 emphasise 'anaphoric', though this is not 
contrastively stressed (as deduced from basic stress pattern, tune- text 
association, and the nature of the requirements for 'pause'). 
Liberman observes of this pause: 
'The phonetic nulls •••• (perceived as a kind of pause) seem to be 
different in source from the sort of intonation- break we perceive 
between clauses, or setting off parenthetical s, or (in some cases) 
between subject and predicate . This difference can be observed in 
the fact that some such "pauses" constitute barriers which semantic 
operators like negation cannot penetrate - the "pause" in ["the 
anaphoric reference"] is certainly not of this character.' (L: 196) 
From Liberman's description, he would seem to be saying that most pauses 
occur between two 'intonational phrases', in Selkirk's terms, while those 
pauses brought about by adding elements to the metrical grid are different 
in kind from the majority. The latter kind of 'pause' is completely 
independent of the structure of the utterance in terms of prosodic units, 
and so conveys no information about syntactic or semantic structure. Thus 
i t cannot affect' semantic operators', as Liberman terms them, being of a 
different nature . This latter type of 'pause' is a phenomenon of rhythm 
and timing, and has the effect of adjusting the timing of the utterance in 
the direction of isochrony (though no claim for perfect isochrony can be 
made). This is because it lengthens the interval between two stressed 
syllables so that the interval approximates to the longer intervals 
between the other stressed syllables . An intonational contour can be 
continued over this type of 'pause' without sounding forced . The same 
cannot be said of intonation contours with the first type of pause, that 
arises from breaks between prosodic units. 
Another feature of stress- shifting is seen in example xiv). Example 
xv) shows a non- backshi fted version. 
169 
xiv) 
0 0 
I I 
1: 1: 
I I 
0' 0' 
+ + 
it was 
0 0 
xv ) it was 
0 0 
2 
I 
L 
I 
0' 
+ 
u 
I 
I 
placed 
0 
0 
0 
0 
placed 
0 
0 
0 
~w ~s 
I I 
IDl IDl 
1 3 
/\ I L' M LS t f\ O's o-w 0- 0' O'w 
+ + + 
underneath Rover 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
underneath Rover 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
In this example, there is a stress clash whether or not the stress is 
backshifted. However, the more natural of the two possible renditions 
seems to be the one where the stress has been backshifted so that it 
occurs immediately after the 4- column on 'placed'. In such a context, the 
4- column on 'un- ' would probably not count as stressed at all, coming 
immediately after a syllable which unambiguously counts as stressed . If 
the stress had remained on '-neath', it might have appeared to gain a 
certain degree of stress due to the preced ing 'low' col umns; but because 
of the 6- column immediately following, it would probably not have counted 
as stressed in this context. The simpler situation of the two, therefore, 
is that where backshifting has applied, since the syllable in question 
here, 'un- I, would be less likely to appear stressed than would '-neath' in 
170 
the non-backshifted case. Naturally, these comments apply only to cases 
(the more usual ones) where the sentence is spoken reasonably quickly. In 
cases where the whole utterance is spoken slowly, 'underneath' may well 
contain a syllable that cbunts as stressed. Even here, however, it is the 
backshifted version that sounds slightly more natural and unforced . 
If one examines backshifting of stress from the point of view of the 
metrical grid, one may easily conclude, with Bolinger, that 
' •.•. an example like a clear- cut problem can more accurately be 
described as a sacrifice of the accent on cut than as a shift of the 
accent "from" that syllable "to" clear, since clear normally has an 
accent anyway •••. ' (Bolinger, 1965:172) 
Al though the process may involve a swapping of's' and 'w' nodes and a 
consequent reallocation of place- holders in the metrical grid, the net 
effect is to deprive a syllable of the prominence it had earlier, even if 
this prominence was merely of a secondary nature. In the case of examples 
such as 'It was placed underneath Rover', both stressable syllables of 
'underneath' lose their prominence, given the normal rate of utterance. 
Thus backshifting of stress could be seen as merely part of the larger 
phenomenon of stress downgrad ing due to contex t. 
171 
3.6. SOME INTONATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
3.6.1 Congruence 
Liberman accounts for intonational patterns by matching the metrical 
structure of the 'text' to the 'congruent' metrical structure of the 'tune', 
one of a certain number of specific and pragmatically significant such 
'tunes'. The structure of each 'tune' is made up of distinct 'tones': 'L' 
(low), 'H' (high), 'L-M' (low-mid), 'H-M' (high-mid ). These are arranged in a 
metrical structure with binary 'w' and's' nodes. These nodes must match 
with the 'w' and's' nodes of the text's 'metrical structure' for this 
intonation pattern to apply to the text (though often an initial 'w' tone 
is optional). 8y 'text', Liberman means 'sentence' or 'utterance'. The 
example below shows congruence between tune and text (L:78): 
® w $ an 
8 
I 
H 
R 
w 
I 
L 
S w 
I I 
H L 
The circled nodes are those which are 'congruent' to the nodes of the 
metrical structure of the tune. The '8' is a 'boundary tone', i.e. a tone 
which is metrically weak and occurs at the beginning (and end) of shorter 
utterances. The 'c' refers to 'content', that is, non-boundary material, 
which is metrically strong. 8y means of the boundary tone, one can account 
for such phenomena as the 'high pre-head'. The 'tune' given above is 
referred to by Liberman as the 'surprise/redundancy tune with "high pre-
head"' (L:77), and associates with the text as follows, where the dotted 
line represents an association derived by rule. Later rules will convert 
to a glide any sequence of pitch levels assigned to the same syllable. 
172 
< 
$ an 
1,/ EnglJsh teacher I I t·,...-
H L H L 
3 I I .6.2 Neutral pattern 
u 
I 
I 
~ ~w ~s 
~ ill ~ illS 
s 
1\ 
w s w 
2 0 3 
I 
I I 2:' ~ Y.. 2: I I H L H 
O"s O"W O"W 0" 0" 
+ + + 
Chichester is nice 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
In this example, there is perfect congruence between the metrical 
structure of the text and that of the suggested tune, giving rise to the 
following association. The representation using tonetic stress marks is 
not meant to imply that this nucleus type is the only one possible. 
'Chichester is ." nicell 
H L H 
The focussed element is 'nice'; this pattern, the statistically 
unmarked rendition, draws attention to the 'niceness' of Chichester. The 
element 'Chichester', while not actually completely predictable, is not 
unexpected - as in a walk around the town , or when reading a description 
173 
of it. Thus 'Chichester' is metrically weak. In British school terms, 
'Chichester' begins a 'high head'; this begins at a high pitch level, but 
most often gradually sinks in pitch towards the low rise on 'nice'. The 
high head could be re,placed by a falling head (symbolised '\I') without 
altering the connotations as described above. The pattern of the 
intonation as described above would be approximately as follows: 
'Chi ches ter is, .... nicell 
• 
3.6.3 Compound nucleus 
y 
I 
~ 
~s ct>w 
I ~ ill ~ illS 
+ + + 
Chichester is nice 
000 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
s 
1\ 
(W) s w 
(H) L H 
In this example, 'Chichester' is focussed, having the highest value of 
[content]. This entails reallocation of's' and lW' nodes, so that there is 
no longer perfect congruence between the metrical structure of the text 
and that of the suggested tune. In such a case, the 'stray' initial 'H' tone 
is realised as the starting- point of a glide on the first syllable of 
174 
i 
'Chichester'. The final pitch glide is brought about by a rule triggered 
by 'low' pitch and a following 'high' pitch specification. This results in 
a rise from a low pitch. 
H L H 
' Chichester is "nicell 
o 
The metrical bracketing of the text follows the syntactic structure 
where possible. The shift of the focussed constituent to 'Chichester' 
causes the least possible disturbance to the overall structure. In terms 
of information conveyed, attention is drawn to both 'Chichester' and 'nice' 
to an equal degree, and there are no hidden implications. 
'Boundary tones' are ignored in these examples, since the initial 
syllable of the sentence is stressed. In such a case, 'the distinction 
between Hand L initial boundary tones is neutralized' (L:81) - in effect, 
no boundary tone is realised. Liberman writes that one can 'think' the 
difference between boundary tones, but that the phonetic effect is 
negligible or non- existent in such cases: thus I have ignored them. 
Example 3.6.2.if the head were of the falling type, would have exactly 
the same realisation as example 3.6.3. in terms of intonation contours. 
Thus the sequence (falling) head plus (low rise) nucleus would be 
indistinguishable from the sequence (high falling) nucleus plus (low 
rise) nucleus. However, it is possible to justify the difference in 
analysis: in example 3.6.3. the speaker can pause briefly (before 'is') and 
still retain the connotations of the version without pause (i.e. attention 
is drawn to both 'Chichester' and 'nice' to an equal extent). This is not 
true of example 3.6.2. D. Crystal has observed that a compound tone- unit has 
a 'bowl' or 'trough' of unstressed syllables between the two nuclei. These 
intervening syllables rise or fall gently, level off, then fall or rise 
(respectively) very gently towards the next nucleus. Crystal describes 
the pattern thus: 
175 
'The syllables between the two kinetic elements must display an 
evenness of pitch pattern, continuing the pitch movement in a 
'trough' or sustained arc from one to the other, for example ~, ___ ,' 
or ,. ,.' (Crystal 1969:218) 
The sentence in 3.6.3. could be produced in this way, but that of 6.2. 
could not be so produced without losing its connotations. The 'gradual' 
contour would be roughly as follows (for3.6~: 
'Chichester is /nice~ 
• 
If there is a pause in 3~6.3., the two separate tone- units (intonational 
phrases) could have the nuclear tones \+\ or /+/ . Without such a pause, no 
sudden 'change in direction' of the intonation contour is allowed, so these 
nucleus combinations would not occur. Crystal distinguishes between 
'exocentric' nucleus sequences, necessitating a sharp change in direction 
of intonation, and 'endocentric' nucleus sequences, showing the 'trough' 
effect - e.g. / + \, \+/ (Crystal 1969). In 3.6.3. however, there can be no 
pause and thus no such possibilities of different types of contour 
sequence, since it is held by some scholars that head type is not 
completely independent of nucleus type (see O'Connor and Arnold, 1961). 
The metrical bracketing of3.6~must be as shown. The only alternative 
bracketing (given below) is incorrect:-
176 
2 0 3 
I 
I I 2:' l\\ 1: 2: I I 
o-s o-w o-w 0- 0-
+ + + 
Chi ches ter is nice 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
It is not possible to pause after 'is' without seeming to hesitate. So, 
al though this bracketing does not contravene the metrical bracketing 
rules, it must be ruled out as incorrect. As a general principle, one 
could state that in simple sentences such as this, the (sur face ) syntactic 
structure must be followed as far as it is possible to do so. 
Liberman's system does not readily allow for compound tone- units, as it 
deals only in simple tone- units, or 'tunes', with recogni sed intonation 
patterns that perform a particular function. Thus his system would be 
unable to distinguish between a compound tone- unit and a sequence of head 
and nucleus, in cases where the intonation pattern is identical. Since 
the connotations are quite different, and the potentialities for pause and 
choice of contour are also different, the proposed system seems to give a 
fuller account of intonation than does Liberman's system. 
177 
3.6.4 Complex nucleus ( i) 
u 
I 
I 
I 
~ 
301 
+ + + 
Chichester is nice 
000 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
H L H 
VChichester is .nicell 
In British school terminology, this pattern is an example of a 'complex 
nucleus', in this case a fall-rise. Attention is drawn to 'Chichester', 
while 'nice' is not unexpected, (as in the situation of looking through 
brochures of 'nice' places to visit, etc.), and so is metrically weak. 
In this example, the semantic weight of 'nice' is reduced, and so it 
becomes merely [1 contentJ. This leads to its being characterised as 
metrically weak, and thus subject to 'dewording', so that it is reduced to 
the status of a weak (stress ) foot. Because of this, it receives only two 
place-holders in the metrical grid, and so may be either stressed or 
unstressed, depending on the reset value of the threshold of the algorithm 
( Le. depending on tempo of utterance ) . The word 'nice' cannot, however, be 
pitch-prominent, even if it is stressed, since it cannot be the DTE of a ~, 
remaining a mere ~ unit. Since 'nice' has been reduced to the status of 
stress foot, it cannot form the sole realisation of the 'H' tone. Thus the 
178 
rise is realised on some preceding syllables as well. If 'nice' is counted 
as stressed (which depends on tempo, etc.), it may continue the rise with a 
small, non- pitch- prominent glide. 
The metrical bracketing ' shown is the only one possible, given the [1 -
content] value of 'nice' and the [0 content] value of 'is', which dictates 
that they be metrically weak. This bracketing does not follow the 
syntactic structure, and if a pause were made after 'is', as suggested by 
this bracketing, the result would be unnatural. However, this pattern must 
be produced without any pause, in order to retain the connotations; this 
is not so in 6.3., where a pause could be made after 'Chichester', and where 
the metrical structure follows the syntactic structure. 
Another possible connotation of 3~.4. is the hidden implication: 
'( Chichester is nice •••• ) but (another town) is even nicer.' This 
implication could be conveyed at least partly by the fact that 'Chichester' 
is the focus of the sentence, 'nice' is not accented, and the intonation 
contour rises, indicating non- finality . Here again, there can be no pause, 
ei ther after 'Chichester' or after 'is', without giving undue emphasis to 
either 'Chichester' or 'nice' respectively, and thus losing the original 
connotations. The nuclear tone type may be changed - for example, to a 
low rise - without changing the relative semantic weight given to each 
word, or the 'hidden implication'. This potential for changing the nucleus 
type is what distinguishes this sentence from one such as 3.6.3., where 
different results would be obtained . 
In example 3.6.4. 'nice' is deworded and so cannot take the 'H' tone on its 
own account. If the tune were the 'L- H' portion of the suggested tune, the 
effects on 3.6.2. and 3.6.3. would be different: 
tune: 3.6.3. ' Chichester is nice l I / " I I / __ ' A I "" ~ ... :1~ ~ ... " ... 
/Chichester is 'nice 
S W L H 
I I 
L H 3.6.4.' Chichester is nice l / , , . I ' ' -," ~",: .. -- ... " ... I. i .-",' ,~~ ..... 
/Chichester is nice 
L H 
179 
The effect of the new tune would be to assign a low rise nucleus in each 
case. A fundamental difference between the two sentences, however, is 
revealed in the fact that the structure of 3.6.4! is still nucleus plus tail, 
as it was in 3 .6.4., while the structure of 3,6;3~,also nucleus plus tail, 
differs from the compound nucleus structure of3.6 ,3 . and has completely 
different connotations. Thus, although in one particular realisation 3.6.3. 
and 3 .6.4. may seem identical on the surface, their structural difference 
becomes evident when one considers such things as potential for pause, 
connotations, and the effects of varying tunes and nuclei. This kind of 
phenomenon is not considered at all by Liberman, and thus indicates 
another possible area where the proposed analysis improves on that of 
Liberman. This is because the latter has no 'semantic level' affecting 
other levels. 
3p.5 Complex nucleus (ii) 
u 
I 
I 
I 
er 
+ + + 
<Jw 
Chichester is nice 
000 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
VChichester is nice 11 
180 
The bracketing shown in this diagram is the only possible one; again, 
no natural pause may be made within the utterance. The word 'nice' has 
been completely deaccented to [0 contentJ, leading to defooting. Since 
the only word with a positive value of [contentJ is 'Chichester', this must 
become [3 contentJ, leading to its bracketing as the DTE of the utterance, 
and assignment of the nucleus on this word. 
This example differs from3.6.4 .in that, in 3.6.5., 'nice' cannot be stressed 
without coming to seem too important for its context. The context is one 
in which 'nice' is anaphorically destressed; e.g. when the utterance is a 
response to a question such as 'Which town did you say was nice?'. A 
compound nuclear tone is not possible in 3.6.5., since 'nice' cannot be the 
DTE of a phonological phrase, being reduced in status to a mere syllable. 
Thus it can never be either pitch-prominent or stressed. A more usual 
tune for this type of utterance would be as follows (i.e. a high fall 
nucleus) : 
nice 
I /\ 
, . Chlchester is nice 11 
H L S W 
I I 
H L 
Anaphoric destressing is the change to [0 content J from a posi ti ve 
value of [contentJ. 'Contrastive stress' is the extreme case of anaphoric 
destressing, when all the words after (or before) the focussed constituent 
have been destressed. This is what has happened in 3.6.5., which has 
contrastive stress on 'Chichester'. In this case, as in3.6.4. 'nice' cannot 
be the DTE of a f' being defooted, and so it cannot take a 'tone' on its own 
account. 
181 
3h.6 Stressed nonlexical word 
Chichester IS nice l ,'" , I ' , , ' , .' , ' ~' 
232 H L H 
·Chichester /IS nice 11 
• 
+ + + 
Chichester IS nice 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
In this fairly unusual situation, stress falls on a nonlexical word, in 
this case the copula. The nonlexical word then takes (3 contentJ and 
becomes the DTE of the utterance . The word 'nice' mayor may not be 
counted as stressed, depending on the reset value of the threshold 
(corresponding to tempo of utterance). The nuclear tone type is a low 
rise, in this instance. The metrical bracketing follows syntactic 
structure, and there may be a slight pause after 'Chichester'. This 
utterance could be spoken in a situation where the copula is to receive 
emphatic stress, as if protesting the truth of what is asserted. More 
usual would be a falling nucleus on 'is', giving the utterance more of an 
air of 'emphatic finality', which is more appropriate to the function of 
asserting the truth of what is said. If 'nice' were destressed to [1-
contentJ or [0 contentJ, it could never count as stressed; if it is [2-
contentJ, there remains the possibility of its being stressed. It cannot 
be a ~w unit, as the DTE of the U is the last f unit. To become pitch-
prominent it must thus be an I unit, which would be very rare. 
182 
3.7. LOCATION OF [3 CONTENTJ 
3.7.1 Neutral pattern 
Within each I unit, only one word is usually [3 contentJ. This word is 
usually the last lexical word in the I unit. However, in some cases more 
than one word may be [3 contentJ, i.e. the focussed constituent may be a 
prosodic unit of a level higher than the prosodic word. For example, an 
answer to the question; 'To whom did John give the information?' could 
perhaps be; 'John gave the information to Susan's uncle', with destressing 
of 'John gave the information to' and consequent contrastive stress on 
'Susan's uncle'. [4J In a neutral rendition of the sentence, only 'uncle', 
not 'Susan's', would be prominent, as in the example on the next page, which 
is in a less emphatic style than the rendition given in sections3.4.6.and 
3.5.4. A suggested intonation pattern is also given. 
3 . 7.2 Contrastive stress 
Wi th contrastive stress on 'Susan's uncle', both 'Susan's' and 'uncle' 
would be [3 contentJ, while all preceding words would be [0 contentJ, 
having been destressed. Defooting applies to all monosyllables that are 
[0 contentJ, giving the example on page185 where the syllable 'in- ' may 
perhaps also count as stressed. A possible intonation pattern is given. 
It is difficult to produce a long stretch of completely unstressed 
syllables, and the stress on '- ma- ' (also the possible stress on 'in- ') will 
break up an otherwise intolerably long stretch. This could be seen as 
further support for the fact that the defooting rule as formulated in 
3.4.5.1. applies only to monosyllables. Since 'Susan's' is [3 contentJ, it is 
[4J See section 3.3.7. 2. for remarks on contrastive stress and emphatic 
stress. 
183 
for 3.7.1. 
IUl 
2 2 0 
r I I 
2: 2: 1: 
I I I 
0" 0" 0" 
+ + + 
John gave the 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
'John gave the 
• 
quite likely to become 
u 
I 
I 
IUls 
2 
~ 
A 2:s A O"S O"W O"S O"W 
+ + 
in for ma tion 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
1 
I 
2: 
I 
0" 
+ 
to 
0 
0 
·infor'mation to ·Susan's 
• 
• • • 
IUls 
2 3 
I I 
2: 2: 
1\ A 
O"S O"W O"S O"w 
+ + 
Su san's un cle 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 
,unclel 
0--... 
• 
a t unit on its own, and thus becomes pitch-
prominent. By the usual rules of bracketing, 'uncle' must always be 
stronger than 'Susan's', and it thus receives the nuclear tone whatever the 
phrasing of the sentence. The effects of different phrasings are seen in 
non-nuclear words only. 
3,7.3 Emphatic stress 
If the utterance is spoken with emphatic stress on 'Susan's uncle', the 
only change from the neutral pattern would be that 'Susan's', being [3 
contentJ, would be much more likely to become the DTE of a t unit and thus 
pi tch- prominent, as in the example on page 186. A suggested intonation 
pattern is also given. 
184 
for 3.7. 2. 
0 0 
I 1 
L L 
I I 
0' 0' 
+ + 
John gave 
0 0 
u 
I 
I 
0 
I 
7.. 
I 
0' 
+ 
the 
0 
in 
S 
S 
~w 
I 
w 
0 3 
~"'" I I L L 
I ~~w Cf' A LS A O's O'w Cf's O'w 
+ + + + 
for ma tion to Susan's un 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
John gave the infor·mation to 'Susan's ,uncle " 
• 
• 
~s 
I 
III 
3 
I 
L 
A 
Cf's O'w 
+ 
cle 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
The only difference between the example in3.7.3. and the 'neutral' 
pattern of3.7.1. is that 'Susan's' is pitch-prominent in the former, owing to 
its greater semantic weight. In the suggested intonation pattern it is 
also highlighted by a pitch jump up. While a step down in pitch would have 
sufficed to make it pitch-prominent, the fact that this word is [3 
content] calls for even greater prominence. This can be achieved by means 
of the step up in pitch, indicated here by an upwards arrow. 
185 
for 3.7.3. 
IlIl IlIlw 
2 2 
I I 
L L 
I I 
(j (j 
+ + 
John gave 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
'John gave 
• 
3.7.4 Discussion 
S 
u 
I 
I 
A IlIlS 
0 2 
I ~ 
L A LS I A (j (js (jw (js (jw 
+ + + 
the in for ma tion 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
the ·infor'mation to 
• 
11 
IlIl IlIl 
1 3 3 
I I I 
1: L L 
I A A 
(j (js (jw (js (jw 
+ + + 
to Su san's un cle 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
1"Susan's ~uncle ll 
• 
......... 
As noted, the preceding examples would have the nucleus on 'uncle' only. 
In a relatively short sentence such as this, it would be unusual to find 
that both 'Susan's' and 'uncle' were the DTE of an intonational phrase, and 
thus the nuclei of separate tone units. Because of this, the different 
phrasings do not affect nuclear tone placement, and relying on the latter 
alone will give no clue as to the phrasing. This point is made by Chomsky, 
taking as his example the phrase 'an ex - convict with a red SHIRT' (Chomsky 
186 
:.. 
1970). The capitalised word, in Chomsky's notation, carries the nuclear 
tone. He points out that this phrase could be interpreted as focussing on 
any of the following constituents;-
i) an ex-convict with a red shirt 
ii) with a red shirt 
iii) a red shirt 
iv) shirt 
These different interpretations correspond to different phrasings of 
the same sentence, where the focussed constituent may be either the last 
lexical word (as in iv) or else the last prosodic unit of some higher 
level (as in i, ii, and ii i). The different interpretations may be 
represented as in the next diagram. (Interpretation iii would have 
exactly the same representation as interpretation ii, and so is not shown 
separately. ) 
i) u ii) u 
-------
I 
Iw Is I 
S 
/\ s /'--... ~w 1>s 1>w 1>s 1>w 1>w 1>s 
I I I I ~ I I \JU ID  ~ lllS \JU 
0 3 3 1 0 3 0 2 2 0 3 
I I ~ I I I I I 1,\ I I 
z 2: 2:s t 2: Z 2: 1: 2: 2:s t 2: 2: I I I I I I I I I I I 
er er er er er er er er er er er er er er 
+ + + + + + + + + + + + 
. 
an ex- con vict with a red shirt an ex- con vict with a red shirt 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
187 
i) 
iV) 
ii) 
an 'ex- /convict I with a 'red ,shirtll an ex-'convict with a 'red ...... shirtll 
<Pw 
+ + 
u 
I 
I 
2 1 
+ + 
s 
o 2 3 
I I I 
L L L 
I I I 
(y (y (y 
+ + 
an ex- con vict with a red shirt 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
" 
• 
an ex- 'convict with a ·red ,shirtll 
• • 
In each of the three examples, the suggested intonation pattern makes 
prominent the appropriate words. In cases where the intonation pattern is 
such as to make explicit the difference between various phrasings, it can 
always be traced back to these different structures. Where the intonation 
pattern does not make structural distinctions explicit, as in 3.6.2.and 3.6,3, 
the differences are seen in varying potentialities for such things as 
pause position and tune type. 
In the discussion of intonational considerations in sectionsaaand31, 
it can be seen that there are various degrees of divergence from the 
normal, more frequent pattern, which is represented by 3.6.1. The smallest 
degree of divergence is seen in3.6'~Jwhere a [2 content] and a [3 content] 
value are exchanged: this necessitates no rebracketing, merely a change 
188 
in higher- level node labelling. A little more divergent than this is the 
example in 3.6.3., where. as well as a relocated [3 content]. a [2 content] 
word is destressed to [1 content]. This pattern on the semantic level 
necessitates rebracketing on the phrasal level. but need not affect the 
distribution of stressed and unstressed syllables as defined on the 
metrical grid. More divergent still is example 3.6.4, where a normally [2 
content] word has been completely destressed to [0 content] . As in 6.3 •• 
this necessitates rebracketing at the metrical level. but there is the 
difference here that the destressed word cannot possibly count as 
stressed. in terms of the metrical grid. Thus the distribution of 
stressed and unstressed syllables in the sentence has changed. Most 
di vergent is 3.6.5., where a normally [0 content] word becomes [3 content]. 
and so is not affected by the defooting rule. This leads to changes in the 
node- labelling at a level higher than that of the word. also to the 
development of a 'new' stressed syllable where there was none in the 
earlier interpretations. If the nonlexical word involved had contained a 
normally [-full] vowel. this would have been changed to a [+full] vowel. 
when stressed. and only in this (very divergent) situation. 
Likewise. in section3~Z it is the case where lexical words take a value 
of [0 content] that corresponds to the greater divergence from the norm -
that is. contrastive stress is more disruptive of the normal pattern than 
is emphatic stress. in terms of phenomena at the semantic and phrasal 
levels. Some tentative support for this grading of contrastive and 
emphatic stress may be seen in the fact that the latter (as observed in 
a3~2l is essentially paradigmatic in operation. and so cannot affect the 
syntagmatic metrical structure as profoundly as can the more syntagmatic 
contrastive stress. 
189 
3.8. APPLICATION OF THE SYSTEM TO WELSH 
3.8.1 Vowel level 
Welsh does not reduce vowels in the same way as English, since schwa can 
be stressed in Welsh. Welsh vowel mutation, though similar to vowel 
reduction in that it involves a change to schwa, is in fact independent of 
stress (which nearly always falls on the penult) and depends instead on 
the location of the given vowel with respect to the final syllable. Thus 
there is little justification for a feature [±fullJ (or any other such 
segmental feature), and there are no distinctions to be made at the 'vowel 
level' in Welsh. 
3.8.2 Word level 
3.8.2.1 Vowel length rules 
Selkirk's system may be adapted for Welsh, with one important 
modification. In English, the status of a syllable in terms of 'stress 
feet' can be said to reflect the 'syllable weight', which involves e.g. 
tenseness of the vowel and number of following consonants. In Welsh, on 
the other hand, although vowel length is phonemically distinctive, it can 
nearly always be predicted from the quality of any following consonants 
within the same syllable, subject to the overriding principle that vowels 
in unstressed syllables are short whatever the following segments. The 
general principles behind Welsh vowel length may be stated informally as 
follows. [5J 
[5J Rules and exceptions adapted from T. Rhys Jones (1977:21-22). 
190 
i) In unstressed syllables (non-penults and unstressed monosyllables) 
All vowels are short. (This class includes the 'procli tics'). 
ii) In stressed syllables (penults and stressed monosyllables) 
Vowels are short in the following environments:-
oc) When followed by one of Ip,t,k,m,~1 
~ When followed by two or more consonants. 
Y) When all vowels except orthographic 'if and 'u' (Le. lil and some 
cases of 141 respectively) are followed by one of Il,n,r/. 
Vowels are long in the following environments:-
oc) Syllable-finall~ 
~ When followed by any consonant other than those mentioned above 
(Le. Ib,d,g,f ,e,x,v ,'6,s/). 
Y) Orthographic 'if and 'u' are always long before Il,n,r/. 
iii) Exceptions 
oc) Exceptions to these rules are few; some vowels are marked with a 
circumflex orthographic ally to indicate a long vowel in an 
environment where a short vowel would have been predicted by the 
usual rules. 
e.g. 01 behind 
10:11 
par pair 
Ipa:rl 
pel ball 
Ipe:ll 
~ A very few words contain vowels that are long where a short vowel 
would have been predicted, and yet are not marked with a circumflex 
orthographically. 
e.g. hen old Ihe:nl dyn man Id4:nl 
Y) In polysyllables, a stressed long vowel becomes somewhat 
shortened to 'half-long', but is still recognisably distinct from a 
stressed short vowel, the difference lying partly in the quality of 
the vowel. 
e.g. ceg mouth 
[ ke:g] 
cegin kitchen 
[ke·gIn] 
ceginau kitchens 
[kegi·ne] 
R. Jones (1967), in a study of three Welsh dialects, states that 
this 'half-length' occurs in only one of the dialects, namely that of 
Ty Ddewi (St. David's), the only Southern dialect of the three. His 
two North Welsh dialects have a short vowel instead. When pre-
191 
consonantal, a stressed short vowel in a polysyllable provides the 
environment for 'extra duration' of the consonant, which is markedly 
lengthened (R. Jones 1967:38 ). 
S) Some English loa~-words contain vowels that are short where by 
Welsh rules they would have been long; such words are few in number. 
e.g. bag bag Ibag/, pin pin Iprn/, bil bill Ibrll 
The vowel schwa, while a separate phoneme in Welsh and capable of being 
stressed, has no long ' counterpart. Even under the conditions appropriate 
to a long vowel, it remains short. The other vowels can be seen as 
longl short pairs, as in the following diagram. [6] 
i: 
r 
e: 
Welsh vowel system 
( 4 (:) ) 
a 
a: 
u: 
0: 
The quality differences arising from the length variation are seen by 
Jones as merely allophonic, determined solely by the independent length 
'prosodeme' (R. Jones 1967:211). However, there are a few minimal pairs 
distinguished by the occurrence of a long or short vowel, for example:-
set seat ,pew Ise:tl set set IsEtl 
ton tune ,tone Ito:nl ton wave It~nl 
dim team (leni ted) Idi:ml dim nothing Id tml 
" tiny Ima:nl man place Imanl man 
gwn gown Igu :nl gwn I know Igt)ol 
bOrn I was Ib4:ml bum five (lenited) Ib4ml 
Such examples support a view of the corresponding long and short vowels 
[6] Only North Welsh dialects possess 14 (:)/; in South Wales this has 
become [i:] or [r], as appropriate. 
192 
as separate phonemes. [7] These (descriptively adequate) rules may be 
taken as the basis for an analysis of Welsh on the same lines as the 
proposed analysis of English. It will also be sufficient to consider only 
'normally-stressed' words that is, stressed monosyllables and 
polysyllables stressed on the penult. There are some exceptions, but 
these are due either to direct borrowing from the English, or to 
historical syllable contraction, or to the presence of an unstressable 
proclitic as the penult. 
3.8.2.2 Underlying word structure 
Selkirk's system of 'stress feet' may be adapted for Welsh so that a 
vO ... lel which is 'long' according to the above rules constitutes a 
monosyllabic foot, while two neighbouring 'short' vowels join to make up 
one stress foot. The stress superfoot also appears, where the 'stray' 
syllable may be either to the left or to the right of the first-level foot, 
and, in underlying structure at least, must contain a 'short' vowel. The 
feet are joined in a right-branching structure according to Selkirk's rule 
for English; i.e., of two sister nodes, the second is strong if and only if 
it branches (see end of section3.2.2). Since schwa can never be long, it 
can never occur in a syllable constituting a monosyllabic foot. Examples 
of underlying structures follow. 
i)f ii) IJII 
1\ ~, rt is t 
O"s ~ ~ ~ 
~ n4s new id 
ynys newid 
island change 
Hi) IJII 
~tt 
O"W 0" ~ 
kav new id 
cyfnewid 
change 
iv) IJII 
~ 
W S 
rtft 
~s ~ ~ ~ 
kav new id jad 
cyfnewidiad 
exchange 
[7] Williams (in press) presents an analysis of the Welsh vowel 
system in which certain consonants are viewed as underlyingly 
geminate, and the preceding vowel therefore short. Vowel length is 
seen as partially dependent on the number, rather than the nature, of 
following consonants; thus vowels are not marked for length in 
underlying structure. 
193 
v) IJU vi) IJU vii) IJU 
w~ A lA /is s ~ /"-.... 
TS Tw TS } 2:s } } 2:s } I I 
o"w 0" 0" 0" 0" 0" 0" 0" 0" 0" 
kav new id ja da~ ta~ U ta~ U oi~ 
cyfnewid iadau teulu teuluoedd 
exchanges famil y families 
This type of underlying representation makes explicit the identity of 
sequences such as 'newid' under different stress patterns which may change 
the distribution of short and long syllables within the sequence. Thus, 
in the examples above, each syllable of 'newid' (whether this is a single 
word or part of a longer word) constitutes a monosyllabic foot, even where 
one or both syllables are unstressed (i.e. not the DTE of the word). In 
the derived representation, however, no syllable that is not the DTE of the 
word may constitute a monosyllabic foot - i.e. it may not be long - and 
the DTE may only constitute a monosyllabic foot if the environment is 
appropriate. Thus there is a rule 'defooting' all syllables that are not 
the DTE of a word, giving such surface representations as the following. 
i' ) IJU ii') i 
\ 
,\ 2: /\ 
iii') IJU iv' ) IJU 
it; /;2:' J\ f~ 
O"s O"W 0" O"W o"w 0" O"W O"s O"W 0" O"w 
'd n~s new Id kav new Id kav new id jad 
vi' ) w vii') l1li 
I h~ 2:' f\ 
0" o"w O"W 0" O"w 
v') 
Id ja de ta~ U ta~ U oi~ 
194 
3.8.2.3 Surface word structure 
In the above examples, 'defooting' has applied to non- DTE syllables, 
which are now represented as containing short vowels. The final syllable 
of v'), the plural morpheme ' - au', becomes [ -e ] in colloquial Welsh, and is 
represented here in this form, while the first diphthong in vi') and vii'), 
the diphthong ' - eu- ', becomes [~ ~] in non- final syllables, and is 
represented here in this form . 
The rules of defooting for monosyllabic [0 content] words, and 
dewording for monosyllabic [1 content] words, apply in Welsh as in English 
(see3.4.5.1. and 3.4.5.2). A more detailed consideration of the segmental 
differences between underlying and derived representations will be found 
in Williams (in ,press). It is worth pointing out that this analysis 
allows the following structure (i.e. a word consisting of a single syllable 
that does not count as a foot). 
Such a pattern would not be found in English, where such 'stray' 
syllables could not constitute a prosodic word. In Welsh, however, it is 
possible for any vowel, short or long, to be stressed, and this fact may be 
easily reflected by allowing both 'footed' and 'non- footed' syllables to 
consti tute monosyllabic words. Such a pattern is seen in the case of 
unstressed monosyllables, i.e. nonlexical words such as the possessive 
adjectives 'fy', 'dy', 'ein', etc., the particle 'yn', the definite article 'y', 
'yr', etc. (see also sectiona8.2.5.2. in the case of prefixes). Also, very 
many lexical monosyllables take this pattern, such as 'plant', children; 
'cot', coat;and 'twp', stupid. 
195 
3 .8.2.4 The prosodic word 
In Welsh as in English, there seems to be some difficulty in defining 
what constitutes a prosodic word and what is an element on the phrasal 
level. Welsh also makes use of 'compound words', formed from two or more 
simple (i .e. noncompound) words. These compounds are often stressed on the 
penult only, as in monomorphemic words. Other compounds, however, have 
more than one stressed syllable. This difference in stress pattern is 
M.A. 
discussed by,<'Allen (1975) as one of the reasons for distinguishing' strict' 
and 'loose' compounds; the latter have an internal word boundary, the 
former have merely an internal morpheme boundary. 
Allen deals also with vowel mutation and inflectional phenomena in 
support of her analysis . Vowel mutation is a morphological alternation 
whereby certain vowels appear as schwa in non- final syllables; for 
example, when the addition of a suffix deprives them of final syllable 
status. The changes in vowel quality are as follows. 
ai --> i a~ --> ~ 
i.e. ai --> ei au --> eu 
u/a --> ~ (some cases of ~(:) -->03 
w --> y (y --> y) orthography 
In some compounds, vowel mutation occurs regularly as in simple words, 
e .g . 'gwraig', wife --> 'gwreig- dda', goodwife. In other compounds, however, 
this does not occur: e.g.-
cyn- faer /k~n vair/ ex- mayor 
gau- broffwyd /ga~ brofw~d/ false prophet 
Another distinction between compounds, according to AlIen, is seen in 
the case of inflection. Some compounds inflect only the second element, 
thus 'behaving as if' they were simple, monomorphemic words - e.g.-
dryg- ddyn 
/dr~g ~~n/ 
wicked person plural dryg- ddynion 
/ dra g ~:nj.J n/ 
Other compounds inflect both elements, as though each were a separate 
word, as in the foll owing; -
nefol yon- wybodeu heavenly sciences 
196 
It is in this type of compound only that suspension of the second 
element can occur, as in the following example:-
nefolion- aIr daerolion- a thandaerolion bethau 
of heavenly and earthly and under- the- earthly things 
/nev jlj~n ar dair~ lj ~ n a Sandair~ lj ? n beSe/ 
AlIen also uses evidence from the productivity of compounds to argue 
for her distinction between str ict compounds (with internal morpheme 
boundary) and loose compounds (with internal word boundary). In the 
preceding examples, these were respectively the first and second type of 
compound word. AlIen states that loose compounds may be freely formed, 
their meaning easily derivable from the meaning of their parts, while 
strict compounds are not freely formed, are fewer in number, and have a 
meaning not transparently derivable from the meanings of their parts, 
being fixed into a more idiomatic meaning. 
Stress patterns also support AlIen's analysis. She finds that her 
'strict compounds' are stressed regularly, on the penult, while 'loose 
compounds' have two stresses, supporting an analysis that considers them 
to be separate words. 
Thus an analysis distinguishing between compounds which are a single 
word and compounds which are made up of more than one word is supported by 
evidence from vowel mutation, inflection, productivity and semantics, and 
stress patterns. Strict compounds consist of a single prosodic word made 
up of two or more feet, while loose compounds consist of two or more 
prosodic words joined to form a single higher- level constituent. 
3.8.2.5 Irregularly-stressed words 
Some words in Welsh are not stressed on the penult. Most of these 
exceptions are stressed on the final syllable. Those that are not are 
usually loans from English that have retained the English stress pattern, 
/ 
as in 'Methodist', Methodist, stressed on the first syllable. Such 
irregularly- stressed loans are few in number, and will not be considered 
further. Among the native words the finally- stressed words may be 
analysed into two main types. 
197 
3. 8.2.5.1. Syllable contraction 
Some words that originally contained an open penultimate syllable and 
an ultima beginning with a vowel later contracted the last two syllables 
to one syllable, due to the lack of an intervening consonant, leaving the 
stress on the new final syllable. 
Such words are 'parhau', to continue, Iparha4./, and any of the verbs 
ending in '-haul or '-aut; also isolated instances of contraction such as 
'Cymraeg', Welsh (language), Ikamraig/. Some monosyllables, such as 'maes', 
field, Imais/, were once disyllables, contracting later to a single 
stressed monosyllable. This process of contraction took place mostly 
before the Middle Welsh period, in the spoken language at least - that is, 
before the twelfth century A.D. ( see D. Evans, 1976:4-5, for details of 
contraction) • 
These words are considered by Griffen (1979) to have an underlying 
uncontracted form, in which the stress is regular. A later rule contracts 
the two final syllables at a stage after the assignment of stress, so that 
the new final syllable remains stressed. Thus 'parhau' would be analysed 
as follows. 
i) \JU ii) \JU iii) \JU 
~~ \ ---> 2:' ---> tfs tfs ffS r 
o-w 0- 0- o-w 0- o-w o-w 0-
par ha 4. par ha 4. par ha4. 
underlying form defooted form con tr ac ted form 
When a final syllable is stressed, naturally its vowel remains long 
(Le. 'footed' if the environment is appropriate. Thus the diphthong in 
'parhau' remains long. 
3.8.2.5.2. Prefix as penult 
Other finally- stressed words are disyllables in which the penult is a 
prefix which can never be stressed. These include the prefixes 'ym- ' 
198 
(reflexive and reciprocal), 'an-' (negative), 'cam-' (wrong, mis-), etc., as 
in 'ymdrin' to deal with lamdri:n/; 'annheg' unfair lanhe:g/; 'camdrin' to 
mismanage Ikamdri:nl (last two examples taken from Jones, 1967:21). This 
may give rise to (quasi - ) minimal pairs, such as:-
ymladd to fight l:mla~1 
ymH~dd to wear oneself out la mla~1 
There are no examples of monomorphemic words constituting a minimal 
pair distinguished solely by stress placement; thus there is no 
equivalent to the English distinction digest/dig~st. 
These irregularly-stressed disyllables have the following underlying 
form: 
/\ /\ A A 
I IllS I IllS I fs I IllS I I I 2: 2: 2: 2: I I I I 
o-w 0- o-w 0- '""w 0- o-w 0-
'om la:'b an he:g kam dri:n am dri:n 
The prefixes, being marked [0 content], will subsequently be deworded 
and thus reduced to the status of a single stray syllable attached to the 
following word. Since the rules for node- labelling at the phrasal level 
nearly always assign the order w-s, this analysis agrees with previously 
formulated rules. The 'dewording' is a natural result of the 'defooting' 
rule seen earlier; as the syllables in question do not constitute 
monosyllabic feet, it is only the dewording effect that is seen. This 
analysis makes the prefixes formally identical to the stressless 
procli tics ( e.g. possessive pronouns) and other stressless nonlexical 
monosyllables such as 'y(r)' the, and 'yn' (particle). These three groups 
of monosyllables have the common property of causing mutation (if 
possible) of the initial consonant of the following word. The 
preposi tions also cause mutation, and these, being [1 content], will be 
likewise subject to dewording if monosyllabic. Other monosyllables 
causing mutation are 'a' and, 'un' one, the personal pronouns, interrogative 
pronouns, some intensifiers, and 'neu' or, 'pan' (noninterrogative) when, 
'mort 'cyn' as (in comparisons), and 'sy' which is. ('Y(r)' and 'un' cause 
199 
soft mutation to a following noun only if it is feminine.) All these other 
mutating monosyllables would be [0 content] and thus subject to dewording. 
Thus there seems to be a case for a unitary analysis of all these types of 
monosyllable (proclitic, prefix, and nonlexical word) in terms of a 
separate [0 content] word joined to the following word, which will always 
have a positive value of [content] and thus be the 'strong' partner of the 
two. This analysis reflects the close syntactic and semantic relationship 
between one such monosyllable and the following lexical word, as well as 
the reduced status of this monosyllable (dewording) which leads to its 
being seen as a subordinate element in a larger unit dominated by the 
lexical word. R. Jones (1967) treats this type of larger unit as his 
'Class C' type of 'working unit', since within this unit only one 'primary 
stress' occurs. He writes (op. cit.:28): 
'The units within this class could be called "grammatically marked 
forms". The immediate constituents of such units are a 
discontinuous morph, an exponent of the possessive adjective, plus a 
Class A or Class B unit. They all exhibit phonetic and phonological 
features which are grammatically relevant, e.g. 
[a n .... i] 1st person singular possessive morpheme plus 
[ka:6] cat = [a') 'ha:6i] my cat 
In each example, one and only one primary stress occurs. 
Emphatic stress may occur in connected speech, replacing either the 
primary stress or the final secondary stress, e.g. 
[ClIJ 'ha:,6i] [a~ "ha:,6i] [-a~ 'ha:"6i]' 
T + P + S T + E + S T + P + E 
[In Jones' notation, T = tertiary stress, S = secondary stress, 
P = primary stress, E = emphatic stress] 
Jones gives little consideration to the nature of his four degrees of 
stress, but quotes Gimson on stress: 'When a sound or syllable is 
stressed, it is being uttered with more muscular effort, increased air 
pressure, and greater amplitude of vibration.' (Gimson 1962:24) This 
suggests that he views stress in terms of intensity (and duration) rather 
than in terms of pitch-related phenomena. However, he does not consider 
how far, if at all, such a definition may be applied to Welsh. He writes: 
'Attention to suprasegmental features, however, was limited to an 
impressionistic survey of stress and the duration of speech sounds 
relative to each other. It was found adequate to establish four 
degrees of stress although phonologically within these units [his 
'working units'], only one is relevant. T stress and S stress are in 
complementary distribution, i.e. T = pre-P, S = post P, except that it 
200 
may occur pre- P when there is a potential emphatic stress placement 
on that syllable. Since their distribution is determined by the 
obligatory P- stress, they may all be regarded as positional variants 
of a phonological stress which need not be marked orthographic ally 
except for those forms which depart from the stressed penultimate 
patterning.' (op. cit.:29- 30) 
What this appears to mean is that although four degrees of stress may 
be distinguished (and Jones gives a reference on page 30 to a study 
recognising no less than six degrees of stress), nevertheless the only 
important distinction is between primary- stressed and non- primary-
stressed. This distinction is precisely what the 'metrical grid' of an LP-
type analysis sets out to make plain, in that a theoretically unbounded 
number of stress levels are resolved into the simple distinction between 
stressed and unstressed. 'Nuclear stress' and 'emphatic stress' are then 
as it were overlaid on this basic distinction, since considerations from 
metrical structure (e .g. locating the DTE of a particular type of prosodic 
unit) are then brought to bear on the structure defined by the metrical 
grid and by its algorithm for locating stressed syllables. Such an 
analysis resolves the difficult question of how many 'levels of stress' 
there are (on which it seems even native Welsh speakers cannot agree), in 
that it leaves the answer unspecified . If one wishes to think in terms of 
'stress levels', the number present in a given sentence is dependent on 
such things as word class membership, semantic weight, syntactic and 
metrical structure, and morphological considerations. The same sentence 
may be uttered in different fashions, corresponding to different phrasings 
in terms of prosodic units, and this will also affect the number of 'stress 
levels' present in each utterance of the sentence. Perhaps a common 
failing in past considerations of stress and intonation has been the 
almost universal tendency to take one phrasing of a sentence - the 
'unmarked' and medium- tempo phrasing - as the only possible way of uttering 
that sentence. 
An example of the word- level structure of a short Welsh sentence is 
given on the next page. 
201 
'Mae eu teledu nhw wedi torri i lawr' 
Their television has broken down 
/mai ~ tEle:d~ ntJ we:di t')r ,i (i) laCiJ r/ 
0 
uu ill uu uu uu uu uu 
I I 2~ I /\ rt I 2 2 (1s t 2 2s 2w 2 I I I I I I &' &' &'w er &' &' &' &' &'s er &' 
mae eu tel ed u nhw wed i torr i (i) lawr 
3 ,8.3 Semantic level 
The 'semantic level' for Welsh will be very similar to that for English. 
The only differences are necessitated by differences in Welsh syntax; 
added to the list of inherently [0 content] words are the following. 
particles: e.g. 'yn' (preverbal and pre-adjectival particle) 
'a' (interrogative particle in literary language) 
'nid', 'na' (negative particles) 
'fe', 'mi' (preverbal particles) 
possessive adjectives (both parts) - in Welsh, these quite often consist 
of two separated morphs:-
fy •••• i my 
dy •••. di thy 
ei •••. e his 
eL .•• hi her 
ein •..• ni our 
eich •••. chi your 
eu •..• nhw their 
These morphs flank the noun possessed, and may also be 
used as object pronouns. 
relative pronouns/particles: 'sy', 'mai', 'a', etc. 
As observed before, very many [0 content] words, especially 
monosyllables, cause mutation to the following lexical word. The mutation 
is usually leni tion, Le. the soft mutation, but the nasal mutation and 
spirant mutation also occur. These mutations, once phonetic in origin, 
have been grammaticalised and have lost their phonetic basis. 
202 
Here follows an example of a sentence, showing the semantic level and 
its effects, leading to the derived structure. 
III IJll IJll IJll IJll IJll IJll 
0 0 2 0 0 2 3 
2:' 
2: 2: (isT 2: 2:s T 2: I I I I I 
0" 0" O"w e- O" 0" 0" 0" O"s e- O" 
mae eu tel ed u nhw wed i torr i (i) lawr 
1 
( O"w) (O"w) IJll (O"w 1 IJll IJll IJll 
0 0 2 0 0 2 3 
2:' 2:' f\ f~ 2: 2: /\ I 
0" Cl' O"w 0" O"w 0" 0" O"w O"s O"w 0" 
mae eu tel ed u nhw wed di torr i (i) lawr 
3. 8.4 Phrasal level 
There has been very little work on vlelsh syntax within the framework of 
transformational - generative grammar. Only two widely- available works are 
published in English. Of these, perhaps Jones and Thomas (1977) is the 
clearest and simplest. I have followed their proposals for syntactic 
structure, adapting them where necessary to form metrical structure along 
the lines suggested by Liberman for English - that is, allowing a kind of 
'cli ticization' to take place (see 3.5.4.) to prevent too deep a nesting of 
the DTE and to split up longer stretches into more manageable sub- units. 
For simple sentences, Jones and Thomas recognise the following 
syntactic constituents:-
S, NP, N, VP, V, AUX (tense inflection), PT (pre- sentential particle), 
203 
ADJUNCT (prepositional phrase, etc.), PP (prepositional phrase within the 
VP), ASP (aspect marker), PRED.PH (predicate phrase), COP (copula), FEL 
('fel' as /vell) , ADJ, P (preposition). 
3.8.4.1 Some PS rules for Welsh 
Jones and Thomas set up PS rules for simple sentences, as follows. 
i) 
H) 
Hi) 
iv) 
v) 
S ---> PT AUX NP VP ADJUNCT 
rp ) (PP) (PP)] V 
(PRED.PH) 
VP ---> (ASP) 
rED•PH } COP NP 
PP 
PP ---> P NP 
AUX ___ > { ~::H I 
- ODD) (past tense marker) 
(future tense marker) 
(imperfect tense marker) 
{ 
YN 1 fNP } ('YN' = the 
FEL/COP NP) ADJ 
PRED.PH ---> 
3.8.4.2 Some transformational rules for Welsh 
particle 'yn') 
Jones and Thomas also set up four transformational rules for Welsh:-
i) The auxiliary carrier transformation moves aspectual BOD ('bod' to 
be /bo:d/) if selected, or the verb or copula BOD if there is no 
aspectual BOD, to the place of auxiliary constituent, to carry the 
auxiliary features in various inflected forms. The ASP constituent 
rewrites as one of the following: BOD YN (progressive), BOD WEDI 
(completive), BOD AR (about to do something), BOD NEWYDD (to have 
just done something). 
H) The identificatory noun phrase inversion transformation (an 
obligatory rule) moves the object NP of identificatory copula 
sentences to initial position. 
204 
iii) The YNA - insertion transformation applies optionally to insert YNA 
(' yna ' , there /(a ) na /) immed iatel y after the auxil iary carrier, in 
the case of locative sentences involving an indefinite subject noun 
phrase. 
iv ) The GAN- movement transformation applies to locative sentences 
involving GAN (or GYDA ) i.e . 'gan', 'gyda' with / gan, gada/ ; the rule 
interchanges the GAN phrase ( or GYDA phrase ) with a subject noun 
phrase. 
3.8.4.3 Examples 
Jones and Thomas give some examples of the structure of a simple 
sentence, such as the following. ( 'Mi', the presentential particle, would 
be 'fe' in South Wales. ) 
S 
PT AUX NP VP 
~ 
V NP 
I ~ 
mi wnaeth y ceffyl fwyta y moron i gyd 
[mr nai8 a ke:f~l vwi:ta 0 m:Jr:>n r g~d] 
w 
( the horse ate all the carrots ) 
205 
S 
~ PT AUX NP VP 
~ 
V NP 
I ~ 
mi {_Odd] John 
-ith 
-ai 
palu yr ardd 
[mr {-';)~l d3~n 
-rS 
-ai 
pal4. (a ) r ar~] 
(John r:~:l dig 1 the garden ) 
[ ·WOUld dig 
The second structure has more generality, since the AUX there rewrites 
solely as the tense markers. The auxiliary carrier transformation then 
moves either the verb or the auxiliary verb 'gwneud', to do, to the AUX 
position. 
S 
PT AUX NP VP 
~ ASP V pp 
Q I ~ 
'r -AI John bod yn edrych ar y teledu 
The auxiliary carrier transformation then moves BaD to the AUX 
position. As carrier of the AUX item -AI, BaD becomes OEDD; this process 
compares with the moving of the verb to the front. The derived structure 
is therefore as follows;-
roedd John yn edrych ar y teledu 
[roi~ d3?n an edr4.x ar a t@le:d4.] 
(John was watching the television ) 
206 
3 ,8.4.4 An alternative syntactic structure 
Jones and Thomas suggest a 'more sophisticated diagramming of these 
segments which reveals their relationship to the sentence and to each 
other •••• ' ( op. cit .:13 ) This is as follows: 
SENTENCE 
PRE- SENTENTIAL 
PARTICLE 
mi 
[mI 
AUXILIARY 
wnaeth 
naiS 
w 
PROPOSITIONAL PHRASE 
~ 
fwyta'r moron i gyd 
NOUN PHRASE 
~ 
Y ceffyl 
() ke :f;j, l vwi :tar m ~ r :>n I g;j,:d J 
( the horse ate all the carrots ) 
Jones and Thomas write, of this structuring: 'Although the use of a 
nucleus segment and a segment equivalent to a pre- sentential particle is 
attested in Katz and Postal ( 1964 ) , the use of such a tree- diagram would 
involve terminological and conceptual innovat i ons which would be outside 
the scope of this book.' (op. cit.: 14 ) [8 J Since their book is mainly 
concerned with a simpler and more general appr oach to the theory, Jones 
and Thomas retain the simpler structure defined by the PS rules cited. 
However, the binary- branching structure described by them as a 'more 
sophisticated diagramming' is more similar to a metrical tree, and it is 
this type of structure that I have used as the basis for the tree diagrams 
of Welsh netrical structure, where possible - with some modifications 
similar to 'cliticization', along the lines suggested by Liberman ( see ~5.4. 
and 3.a4.0~). 
[8 J The reference is to Katz, J.J. and Postal, P. ( 1964 ) in 'An Integrated 
Theory of Linguistic Descriptions' , ( Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press) 
207 
3.8.4.5 Prosodic structure 
Selkirk's system of prosodic units may also be used for Welsh. They 
have the advantage of allowing a clear description of variable phrasing, 
and integrating with the intonational pattern. Thus an example may be 
given as follows, where the word- level structure is derived, rather than 
underlying, structure. 
o-w 
0 
I 
0-
mae 
[ma r 
S 
o-w UlS 
0 2 
I h; 
0- o-w 0- o-w 
eu tel ed u 
~ tEle:d~ 
u 
I 
I 
o-w 
0 
I 
0-
nhw 
nQ 
0 
(Their television 
fw fw fs 
I I I 
Ul 1111 ID 
0 2 3 
I 
I I 2:' fs\ 2: 2: !;\w I 0- o-w 0-
wed i torri ( i) lawr 
we:dt t:>rr laa>r] 
has broken down) 
The prosodic units at the phrasal level are joined in the order w- s, as 
in English. If an attempt is made to join them in the order s- w ( as 
suggested by the [content] values ) , it will be found that i) the result has 
very little relation to syntactic divisions such as NP, VP, and also ii ) 
there are far more 'exceptions' to the rule than there would be under the 
w- s ordering , in sentences that do not have contrastive or emphatic stress. 
208 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Thus the ordering w-s seems most satisfactory, both from the point of 
view of correspondence with (surface ) syntactic structure and from the 
point of view of greater consistency and the beginnings of a reason for 
any lack of consistency. Moreover, under the s-w ordering, the first 
stressed syllable of the utterance would be assigned the greatest number 
of place-holders in the metrical grid. If the w-s ordering is used, it is 
the last stressed syllable of the sentence which is assigned the greatest 
number of place-holders in the metrical grid, and this can be seen as 
corresponding to the 'nucleus' of the sentence. Intonational phenomena 
thus support the ordering w- s, as in English. 
3 ,8.5 Metrical grid 
The metrical grid is defined exactly as for English, on the basis of 
metrical structure. The only difference is that Welsh has no [±full] 
distinction. Thus every syllable will receive a place- holder at the first 
level of the metrical grid, and there will be no need to use the dash, 
since there are no [ - full] vowels. 
Because of the fixed nature of Welsh stress, backshifting of stress is 
not possible. Clashes do occur, naturally, but the impression is that they 
occur far less often than in English; to the English ear, Welsh sounds 
more 'even' and 'flowing'. The fact that, in polysyllables, the stressed 
syllable is always followed by an unstressed syllable, and the fact that 
Welsh has a great profusion of unstressable prefixes and proclitics, may 
help to explain the more evenly-distributed pattern of stressed syllables 
in Welsh. Where stress clashes do occur, the most common pattern seems to 
be a slight pause, and! or a break in the intonational contour. This method 
of dealing with stress clashes is identical to that suggested by Liberman 
as an al ternati ve method to backshifting of the stress (see3:5.5., example 
xii, on 'additional grid elements'). Since Welsh has fixed stress, this is 
the only possible way of dealing with stress clashes in Welsh. 
On the next page follows an example of the metrical grid. The prosodic 
structure at the word level is the derived, rather than the underlying, 
structure . 
209 
0 0 2 
I I A; 
0'" 0'" O'w 0'" O'w 
mae eu tel ed u 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 
0 
3.8.6 Intonational considerations 
u 
I 
I 
O'"w 
0 
I 
0'" 
nhw 
0 
~w 'l>w 'l>s 
I I I 
W ill \W 
0 2 3 
I I I 2:' 11 2: 2: /\ I 
0'" O'"w 0'" S O'"w 0'" 
wed i torri (i) lawr 
0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 
0 
The same general principles may be applied to Welsh as to English, as 
regards fitting metrical structure to intonation pattern. The details of 
Welsh intonation, however, are somewhat different from those of English. 
The following comments are drawn from a study of the intonation patterns 
in Welsh language learning tapes (Williams 1980 ) . These, it was hoped, 
would provide clear intonational cues and maximum exploitation of the 
intonational possibilities. Di fferent sentence-types were considered: 
declaratives, yes-no questions, wh-questions, and imperatives. The 
analysis was conducted in the terms of the British school of intonation 
analysis, using concepts such as 'nucleus', 'tone-unit', 'head', etc. The 
following is a summary of the main findings, which disagreed in minor 
points with C. Thomas ( 1967 ) , the only such study published on Welsh 
intonation. 
210 
3 .8.6.1 Nucleus 
The nucleus in Welsh is a similar entity to that in English, although 
the high rising nucleus does not seem to be systematically present in 
Welsh. The rise- fall is perhaps more common in Welsh than in English. 
Unstressed syllables in the tail may exhibit a slight glide which is, 
however, not pitch- prominent. This is made possible by the fact that the 
'unstressed' final syllables of polysyllables are actually longer and 
louder than the' stressed' penults. 
3 .8.6.2 lIlIead 
The head in Welsh intonation is very different from that in English. 
To begin with, while Crystal describes the 'unmarked pitch level' in 
English as a slight drop in pitch (Crystal 1969:144) , the 'unmarked pitch 
level' for Welsh seems to be a slight rise in pitch from one syllable to 
the next . In pre- nuclear position, this is by far the most frequent type 
of pitch relationship between successive syllables. Thus a slight step- up 
in pitch, in Welsh, is seen as being not pitch-prominent - any other change 
in 'pitch level' will be pitch- prominent. Whereas Crystal postulates 
different norms of pitch movement for stressed syllables and unstressed 
syllables, Welsh seems to require no such division in the definition of 
pitch-prominence. It is only when there is no preceding contour to refer 
to that such' absolute' measures of pi tch- prominence are needed. 
The head in Welsh has a basic pattern referred to by Ceinwen Thomas 
( 1967) as the 'saw- toothed' head . This pattern consists of a sequence of 
stressed syllables each slightly lower in pitch than the preceding 
stressed syllable. The intervening unstressed syllables rise slightly 
from the level of the preceding stressed syllable, giving an effect as in 
the following: 
'ers 'pryd 'rydych chi 'wedi 'bod yn 'dysgu CymVraeg?11 
0 
• • 
0 
" ~ 
[@rs pr4::d r~d4:x XI we:dI bo:d an dasg4: kamraig] 
(How long hav e you been learning Welsh?) 
211 
A slightly less common type of head is one in which the stressed 
syllables rise gently, including the intervening unstressed syllables, to 
produce a steady rise in pitch over the whole sequence. This means that 
only the first stressed syllable is pitch-prominent, given the definition 
of pitch-prominence in Welsh adopted above. An example of such a 'rising' 
head is the following, where there is a pitch glide on the unstressed final 
syllable of the last disyllable. 
'Beth ·ydy ei "henw hi?11 
• '"" 
• 
. 
• 
[be:9 ad4: 4: hentA) hr] 
(What is her name? ) 
The 'unmarked' and 'rising' heads can occur in the same tone-unit, in 
which case the rising sequence usually precedes the drop which begins the 
'unmarked' head contour: 
'Rydw i ·wedi bod yn 'prynu ... hadaul l 
• • 
• 
[r~dwI we:dr bo:d an pran4: ha:de] 
(I've been buying seeds) 
In a few cases, the head contour remains at the same pitch level 
throughout. Any following head contour may take either the ascending or 
the level form. The level head tends to be fairly high-pitched, and is 
usually seen in questions, such as the following: 
~Beth rydych chi'n " feddwl? 11 
• 
• 
[be:9 rad4:x xrn ve:5~lJ 
(What do you think?) 
212 
It will be seen that the 'head' in Welsh shows great variety. As 
Ceinwen Thomas observes: ' ••.. there seems to be far less predictability 
about the pattern of this part of the tune in Welsh intonation than is the 
case in English intonation.' ( op. cit .:19 ) Because of this, it is more 
convenient to deal with each head contour separately (where 'head contour' 
refers to a stretch beginning with a stressed and pitch- prominent 
syllable, and including any following non- pitch- prominent syllables, 
whether stressed or unstressed, up to but not including the next stressed 
and pitch- prominent syllable). A head contour may be seen as 
corresponding to a 'phonological phrase' in metrical structure. 
3.8.6.3 Prehead 
The prehead in Welsh comprises the syllables at the start of the 
utterance up to, but not including, the first stressed and pitch- prominent 
syllable, as in English. The most usual type of prehead in Welsh begins at 
a medium pitch level and rises gently; i.e. the following syllables are 
not pitch- prominent. In some cases, the prehead may be a level sequence at 
mid - voice range, and therefore also non- pitch- prominent. Other types of 
prehead are: the low level prehead, where the level sequence is at a low 
pitch level, and the high rising prehead, rising gently from a fairly high 
pitch level. 
3.8.6.4 Tonetic stress marks 
Tonetic stress marks for Welsh are summarised below. 
nucleus head prehead 
rise "- rise- fall 's unmarked unmarked 
"s s s 
"s low fall Vs fall - rise 's ·s rising ~s ( mid ) level 
's high fall -s level _s low level 
(no high rise nucleus) 0 s high rising 
s = syllable; ·s = stressed but non- pitch- prominent syllable 
s = sudden unsystematic step- up in pitch ( rare ) 
// = boundary of major tone- uni t (/ = of minor tone- unit) 
213 
3.8.6.5 A Libennan-style analysis 
Liberman's approach to intonation analysis may be extended to Welsh, 
with appropriate modifica~ions. The most important difference is that 
since head contours in Welsh are less predictable, some 'tunes' will apply 
not to the utterance as a whole, but to some lower- level prosodic unit -
that is, the phonological phrase. The relevant distinction is between ~ 
units that are the DTE of an intonational phrase, and those that are not, 
since different 'tunes' apply to each kind. The intonation pattern in the 
head seems to bear little, if any, relationship to the type of nuclear tone 
chosen; unlike English, which has certain restrictions on the co-
occurrence of head types and nuclear tone types, according to O'Connor and 
Arnold (1961). Thus different 'tunes' are appropriate for the different 
structures: head contour (or ~w unit) and nucleus (or ~s unit that is the 
DTE of an I unit). The different types of prehead correspond to different 
types of 'boundary tone' - as Liberman writes: 
'Notationally, such boundary tones will 
the purpose of tune- text association, 
corresponding boundaries exist in the 
requires a matching of boundary 
B 
B 
be represented as +. For 
it will be assumed that 
text, and that CONGRUENCE 
to boundary. In the 
configuration t ' the tone T is a terminal element, while the symbol 
B is a non- terminal. For purposes of grid alignment, the B 
positions are (redundantly) weak. In order to include these 
boundary elements in our metrical trees, non-boundary material will 
be called 'content', symbolized by the node label C.' (Liberman 
1975:77) 
The appropriate 'tunes' for Welsh are presented below. 
DTE of I unit ( i.e. nuclear tones) 
~s <1>s <1>s <1>s <1>s 
A /\ A ~ /~ 
s W S W S W S W S W 
~ ~ 
S W S W 
I I I I 
L H L- M L H L L H L H L H 
rise low fall high fall rise- fall fall - rise 
L = low; H = high; L- M = low- mid, al so H- M = high-mid 
214 
,.., 
Non-DTE of I uni t (Le. head contours) 
~w ~w 
~ ~ 
S W S W 
I I I I 
L H H H 
unmarked head level head 
Boundary tones ( i.e. preheads) 
U U U U ("CS j'CS j'CS j'CS 
Bw Bw Bw Bw 
Lt L1M 
I I 
L H 
unmarked (mid) level low level high rising 
3 .8.6.6 Examples 
Some examples of this system are given on the following pages . All the 
examples are taken from the materials studied for Williams (1980). 
In example ii), the stressed syllable of 'oren' is not the DTE of a 4> 
uni t, and so cannot be pitch- prominent. Thus it becomes a stressed 
syllable in the tail of the nucleus. This is an example of a Welsh 
sentence with contrastive stress. The symbol '$', following Liberman, is 
taken to represent the boundary in the text, and is necessary for 
establishing congruence between tune and text. The 'boundary tone' chosen 
here is the unmarked type, rising gently from a medium pitch. The nucleus 
is a rise- fall, and the head is the unmarked type. 
Example iv) is spoken in a very emphatic style, represented in the 
phrasing as a proliferation of I units. This leads to the assignment of 
more than one tone to certain stressed syllables, and corresponding glides 
on nuclear syllables. Such a style of utterance was rare among the 
utterances collected from language learning tapes; most had a maximum of 
two I units. 
215 
;) u 
Cs OTE of I: non-OTE of I: 
I 
I ~s <Pw .~ ~ ~ 
~w <Ps s w s w 
lA I I I I L H L H 
Bw ~ O'w illS lllw 
0 0 2 rr~!,i 'Tt "dod? / / L L' L I 1\ f~ L H L H CTS O'w 0' 0' O'w 0' 
$'yd ych chi ..... eisiau "dod? / / 'ydych chi /eisiau "dod? / / 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
• 
. 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 v 
0 
" 0 
0 
[~d4x XI <life do:d] 
(Do you ~ to come?) 
216 
ii) 
$ 
u 
0 0 2 2 3 
i, 
2: 1\ L 1\ 1\ 
0- 0' O's <7w <7 <7w &s <7w 
Ond mae 'llenn i'r staf ell "'ar all 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 
0 
0 
• 
• 
[~nd mai ot8nrr sta:ve03:: ara'l: 'an ~r8n] 
0 0 
L 
/\ 
<7 <7s <7w 
yn ·or en / / 
000 
o 
o 
• 
( But the curtains of the OTHER room are orange ) 
DTE of I: non- DTE of I: boundary tone: 
~s <t>w 
~ ~ 
S w S w 
1\1 I I 
L H L L H 
$ ond mae 
L / --
'llenn i'r staf ~ll "ar all yn ·or en/ / 
/ , , /; - ~.- I l «-::" .<----- ---' I l/ / l,'/ 
L - M L H L H L 
217 
iii) 
$ 
u 
o 2 
2:' 
f\ 
a 'cuddiwch 
o o 
o 
o 
o 
• 
o 
o 
nhw 
o 
'gydag 
o 0 
o 
o 
o 
• 
3 
ych,ydig 
000 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
• 
[a k~~j(Jx ~G\ gadag axadIg :) bri:~] 
2 
o bridd/ / 
o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
C ••• and cover them with a little soil ) 
DTE of I: non-DTE of I: boundary tone: 
<J>w 
~ 
u 
A 
S w 
I I 
L H 
B Cs 
I L- M 
bridd// 
I 
L 
218 
0 0 2 0 3 1 0 3 3 
1 ± 1 ± 2. 
I I I I 
cr' cr' cr' cr' cr' cr' cr' cr' cr' 
$ mae ern ' gwneud Y /gwaith I yn eich VUe I " chi II 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 
....... \ 
e/ 
[mai en gne4:d Cl gwaie an 4:x te: xi: ] 
(He's doing the work instead of you) 
$ mae I?'n ' gwneud ,y gwaith I yn _~ich Ue I chi! I l " ~ - /\./., !\ --'~-~- ~ 1\ ' ~ , ~- --~ ~ ... "" ... ::::.-:.. -
L-M L H L H H L H H L 
~1 
v) u 
Cs 
I 
I 
S 
/'~ 
~w 1>w ~s 
I I I 
o-w o-w illS o-w ill ill ill 
0 2 0 0 2 3 
2:' 
f\w 2: 2: 1\ I 0- eo O"w (y (ys (yw (y 
$ mae eu tel ed u nhw wed i torri (i) ,lawr/ / 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 
0 
• 
• 
[mai 4: tSle:d4: n& 
o 
we:dr t:Jrr la&r] 
(Their television has broken down) 
'wedi 
I I 
(i) 'torri 
I I 
,lawr/ / 
/\ L H L H L- M L 
220 
4. DISCUSSION 
4.1 Penultimate stress in Welsh 
The modern Welsh pattern of stress on the penult can be realised by two 
types of mechanism. Both phonetic and phonological phenomena add 
prominence to the penult, as can be seen from the following. 
4.1.1 Phonetic mechanisms 
4.1.1.1. Post - stress consonants 
The 'extra duration' of the post - stress consonant (in the case of 
plosives) was noted by R.O. Jones (1967) in a purely auditory study. That 
this extra duration is also present on the acoustic level, however, is seen 
by the results of the measurements in section 2.2.4.1., while the results of 
the perceptual experiments in section 2.3. show that this cue is valid in 
the perception of stress . 
The post- stress consonant's greater length favours the penultimate 
syllable in that it may partially make good the syllable length lost when 
the vowel of the penult is short. It may also indicate greater muscular 
effort, in that, in a continually- varying stream of speech sounds, it would 
require a little more attention and effort to hold an obstruent steady 
rather than to submit to the default timing and articulate it rapidly. 
This, however, is only speculation. The post - stress consonant may also 
contribute to the prominence of the penult in the way outlined in section 
4.2.1 . - i.e. 'interval hearing'. 
4.1 . 1.2. Tendency towards isochrony 
Another phonetic phenomenon adding prominence to the penult is rhythm, 
or rather the tendency towards it. It has been seen (in section 2.2.2.) 
that the acoustically weak penult plays a crucial part in rhythmic 
221 
structure, unlike the acoustically strong ultima. If this were the main 
cue to stress in Welsh, the lack of inherent acoustic cues in the penult 
would then not matter, since the strategy of stress realisation would rest 
on a different basis entirely. This indeed seems to be the case, for no 
other strategy for stress realisation has been found. Also, it is hoped, 
the statistics provided in the course of this investigation go some way 
towards answering Buxton's complaint that descriptions of temporal 
structure in speech 'have been limited to approximate claims about a 
"tendency towards isochrony'" (Buxton 1983:119). 
4.1.1.3. Lack of inherent cues 
It will be noted that the above two phonetic phenomena are both 
'relational' in nature rather than 'inherent', or 'syntagmatic' rather than 
'paradigmatic'. They can only exist in conditions where the utterance as a 
whole builds up a norm of timing (for consonants) or a rhythmic structure 
(for vowels) which allows the relevant units to be characterised as marked 
and therefore stressed. They could not exist 'in citation form'; that is, 
divorced from the context of other units of a similar type in connected 
discourse. 
This is in contrast to the situation in Engl ish, where the stressed 
syllable is most often (but not always) pitch- prominent also. Pitch-
prominence, as defined in terms of a pitch glide within one syllable, or 
very high or low pitch, can be regarded as paradigmatic. This is because 
such features are readily recogniseable in themselves, without the need 
for · reference to be made to neighbouring units of a similar type in order 
to estimate the 'norm'. Pitch-prominence as defined in terms of obtrusion 
from an intonational contour may be more readily seen as syntagmatic, but 
even here there is a difference between English and Welsh: while pitch 
obtrusion may be equally well a step up or down in pitch, the stressed 
penult of Welsh differs in only one direction, in that its vowel is shorter 
(when phonologically short), and, unlike that of the ultima, is often 
reduced to schwa or even lost altogether. Thus penultimate stress in 
Welsh seems to be linked to 'relational' or 'syntagmatic' phonetic 
strategies for realising stress, while stress in English, though making 
use of such strategies (as is seen from the tendency to subjective 
222 
isochrony found by past workers - see section 1.2.5.2.) also makes use of 
'inherent' or 'paradigmatic' cues of pitch, intensity, etc ., which are not 
reliable stress cues for Welsh . 
4.1.2 Phonological mechanisms 
4.1.2.1. Most recent sound changes 
Phonological phenomena can also add prominence to the penult. One such 
phenomenon is that of modern sound changes. For example, in rapid 
colloquial contemporary Welsh, final la4:1 has become shortened to 16 I, 
while final Ivl has been lost altogether in many cases. Final la4:1 is a 
common plural morpheme, seen in such words as llyfrau (now pronounced 
11:a vrE I rather than 11:" vra4:/), and so this development is widespread . 
Final Ivl was often lost historically, but is now dropping not only in 
nouns but al so in both verbs (where it orig inall y formed part of the 
inflection lavl for the first person singular future form), and in the 
superlative forms of adjectives (denoted by the ending lavl, now 
pronounced la/). These are examples of recent developments that reduce 
the ultima and thus lend prominence to the penult. 
4.1 . 2.2. Vowel length rules 
Phonological vowel length is distinctive only in stressed syllables 
(penults and stressed monosyllables). In other contexts the distinction 
between long and short vowels is neutral ised and all vowels are seen as 
phonologically short, whatever their phonetic duration (which may be 
considerable in the case of ultimas) - see Rhys Jones 1977 and Williams 
(in press) for summaries of Welsh vowel length rules . In general, vowels 
are short (in stressed syllables) when followed by two or more consonants 
or by one voiceless stop, nasal, or liquid, within the same syllable. 
Vowels are long when syllable- final or before one voiced stop or one 
fricative of any kind. Schwa is always short, but never occurs in the 
ultima. It will be noted that the rules of phonological vowel length in 
Welsh give prominence to the penult, since this is the only syllable of 
polysyllables in which vowel length is distinctive. 
223 
4.1.2.3. Vowel mutation 
Vowel mutation is the process in Welsh by which certain non-final 
vowels undergo reduction to schwa by morphological alternation . This 
process applies to original lul (orthographically 'w') and to those cases 
of original 14,1 that are orthographically 'y'. The first element of the 
diphthong lail may also be reduced to schwa in fast speech. (For a 
detailed consideration of vowel mutation, see Allen, M.R. 1975, Thomas, A. 
1979, and Williams, in press). For the present purposes it will be enough 
to note that this process, unlike the two mentioned above, gives prominence 
to the ultima by reducing non - final vowels in certain contexts - even the 
supposedly stressed penult may be reduced, while the supposedly unstressed 
ultima is immune to reduction. This situation seems to go against all 
that we know about the workings of stress from other languages; an 
attempted explanation is outlined below in section 4.4.3. It is enough to 
note for now that the penult is not (yet?) completely dominant in the 
pattern of stress in Welsh. 
4.1.3 Type of descriptive theory needed 
4. 1. 3. 1. Welsh 
There is a choice of three main types of theory about stress in the 
attempt to characterise Welsh stress. The first, and more traditional, 
could be termed the 'inherent cues' type. This comprises both the 'British' 
and 'American' approaches, and views stress as a complex of pitch-
prominence, greater intensity, longer duration, and more peripheral vowel 
quality. Such a view has been dominant for many years. The second type is 
Bolinger's theory of stress as 'accent', defined solely on the basis of 
pitch-prominence. This type also has 'inherent' or 'paradigmatic' 
elements, in that pitch- prominence can in some cases ex ist by virtue of 
the intrinsic cue of a pitch glide on one syllable. On the other hand, it 
al so has 'syntagmatic' elements, in that pitch- prominence may ex ist by 
virtue of the relational cue of a difference in pitch between two 
syllables in a particular direction - the pitch- prominence would not exist 
were only the one syllable in question to be present. The third type of 
theory, I ike the first, has no such mixture of elements: the 'metrical' 
224 
theory of stress views stress as purely a syntagmatic phenomenon, defined 
in terms of the relational cue of rhythm. Under this view, the precise 
manner in which the pulse of the rhythm is marked is a purely secondary 
consideration; it is the rhythm that defines the stress rather than vice-
versa. 
In the case of Welsh, it is obvious that the first type of theory will 
not do. There are no consistent stress cues of pitch, intensity, duration, 
and vowel quality - even the 'negative' cue of shorter vowel duration is 
not wholly consistent. Even restricting the cue to pitch-prominence, as 
in the second type of theory, will not give satisfactory results; two 
minimal-pair members with the same pitch-pattern can be interpreted as 
having stress on different syllables according to segmental cues of 
duration. Even where pitch-prominence has an influence on stress 
judgements, this is done not by direct mapping of pitch-prominent 
syllables with stressed syllables, but rather by indirect mapping via the 
possible intonational categories of Welsh. Even here, however, there is no 
very high degree of consistency, since the shift of judgements is by no 
means total and other factors exert an influence. Therefore it seems best 
to adopt the third type of theory for stress in Welsh, viewing the latter 
as based on rhythm alone and only contingently coinciding with pitch-
prominence under certain conditions. 
In order for rhythm to occur, a stretch of time must be marked off into 
roughly equal intervals. The nature of this marking-off is not a crucial 
issue: in some languages, such as English, the marking-off may be done by 
intensity, etc. In Welsh, there are no obvious intrinsic cues to provide 
the 'pulse' of the rhythm. Instead, what seems to happen is that the 
shorter vowel of the stressed penult, and the longer post-stress 
consonant, together form a reference point for the demarcation of rhythmic 
feet: great intensity is not necessary for such a purpose. Once set up 
thus, the (subjective) rhythmic pattern is continued by its own momentum, 
despite many objective irregularities, and is reinforced by perceived 
modifications in segmental duration in the direction of isochrony. 
225 
A further complication is introduced in the case of stressed 
monosyllables. Though not separately examined in this study, these show a 
clear pattern of long duration (comparable to that of final syllables), 
high intensity (as in final syllables), lack of schwa (as in final 
syllables), the possibility of a length contrast (as in penults), and the 
possibility of pitch glides (as mostly occurs on final syllables) and 
pitch obtrusion (as in both penults and final syllables). Stressed 
monosyllables were counted as stressed in all measurements of feet in the 
experiments described in chapter 2. These measurements showed a tendency 
to isochrony underlying the 'syllable- timed' tendency, even when stressed 
monosyllables had been thus included . The answer to the puzzle may be 
that stressed monosyllables have prominence in terms both of rhythmic 
prominence and of intrinsic acoustic prominence, while stressed penults 
have only rhythmic prominence and ultimas, though unstressd, have 
intrinsic acoustic prominence (see section 4.4.3. for further 
consideration of this point). 
4.1.3.2. English 
While there is experimental evidence supporting the use of the 
'metrical' theory to describe stress in Welsh, as has been seen, this is not 
the case for English. Isochrony (mostly of a subjective kind) has been 
noted as a tendency in English for many years, and thus there is some basis 
for applying the metrical theory to English also. The main difference 
between English and Welsh in this respect is that the rhythmic 'pulse' in 
English (marking off the rhythmic units) is provided by vowels with pitch-
prominence, greater intensity and duration, and unreduced vowel quality. 
In Welsh, the pulse is provided by a combination of shorter duration of the 
vowel and longer duration of the following consonant. The situation in 
English seems similar to that of stressed monosyllables in Welsh, where 
both rhythmic and intrinsic cues are the exponents of stress. 
However, this is not to bring back inherent cues by the back door for 
Engl ish. While it may be true that these cues can often be mapped 
directly to stressed syllables, it is also true that such a process is not 
completely accurate; there is always a certain amount of inconsistency. 
This is where subjective isochrony comes into its own; stress can be 
226 
linked, not with the actual occurrences of an intrinsic cue, but with the 
rhythmic pattern set up by these cues and continuing over those stretches 
where intrinsic cues fail to give consistent results. A syllable heard as 
stressed in English may not show a clear pattern of intrinsic stress cues, 
but it may well fit into the rhythmic pattern set up by previous syllables 
that did show greater intensity, duration, etc. This is the reason why one 
cannot stop at intrinsic cues as the primary means of realising stress. 
It is the construct they set up - the sentence rhythm - which is to be seen 
as the basis for stress, however few the cases may be where this construct 
is the sole exponent of stress. 
It may be objected by some that the construct is essentially a 
psychological entity, undiscoverable in the acoustic form of speech. 
Language, however, is used by hUman beings and thus is fH tered through a 
hUman mind; to refuse the psychological the status of 'real' is to deny 
any validity to what happens in the hUman mind and to reduce all language 
to the level of involuntary nervous reflex. Since here we are dealing 
with a psychological entity, it is ncessary to take account of appropriate 
research in the psychology of perception. The next section gives details 
of one piece of experimental work in this area. 
4.2 Some work on the perception of stress 
4.2.1 Interval hearing 
A. Bell (1977) carried out an experiment with speakers of different 
languages which had differing stress rules. The subjects were asked to 
make judgements of stress placement when presented with pure tones varied 
along certain dimensions. It was found that a language's system of stress 
placement had no significant influence on the speaker's perception of 
stress patterns. The most important factor was found to be the 'sensory 
dimension of prominence'; i.e. 'prominence' in terms of Fo or increased 
amplitude or duration. There was a distinct preference, for all subjects, 
for marking their perceptions of the tones as being in groups of three 
with initial stress - every third tone had been made more 'prominent' along 
227 
one acoustic dimension in the experimental tone sequences. 
A major exception, however, occurred in the case of the 'length 
sequence', where every third tone was longer in duration. In 48% of cases, 
there was a preference for groups with medial accent in the transcriptions 
of the rhythmic groups perceived by the subjects (as against 36% for 
initial stress and 16% for final stress). Bell attempts an explanation of 
this as follows . 
'What is surprlslng is that almost half of the responses 
indicated a rhythmic group with the longer sound in medial position 
(- / - ). This is probably related to the fact that the longer sound 
was followed by a correspondingly short interval, since the 
repetition rate was held constant. The longer sound and its 
successor would then tend to be perceived within a rhythmic group . 
In Handel's terms the sequence is composed simultaneously of a 
length pattern ••• _ _ _ ••• and an interval pattern ••• x xx x xx x ... 
The results can then be explained thus: Some listeners perceived 
the length pattern, preferring the rhythmic group _vv to " v - . 
Others perceived the interval pattern, preferring the rhythmic group 
x xx to xx x. This assumes that listeners were able to identify the 
interval organization x xx with the notation - / - .' 
What this means is that the combination 'short tone/long gap followed 
by long tone/short gap' was perceived by half the subjects as marking the 
beginning of a rhythmic foot, while the 'accent' was placed in the middle 
'of this foot. From this it is but a short step to the pattern seen in 
Welsh polysyllables of 'shorter vowel/longer consonant followed by longer 
vowel/shorter consonant', with the most acoustically prominent vowel 
placed in the middle of the foot thus defined . If it is this 'interval 
hearing' that is involved in the case of Welsh stressed penults, it becomes 
clar that our view of stress must be revised somewhat. 
In Bell's experiment, there was no suggestion that any subject 
attributed any kind of prominence to the short tone beginning each unit. 
In Welsh, the prominence of the penult resides in the phenomena of post -
stress consonant length, isochrony, recent sound changes, and vowel length 
rules described in sections 4.1.1. and 4.1.2. above. The penult also enjoys 
a certain amount of importance from beg inning the rhythmic unit and 
forming the basis of the tendency towards isochrony. The acoustically 
prominent ultima is situated after the start of the foot, as was the 
228 
lengthened tone in Bell's experiment. A difference between the two 
situations is seen in the fact that the longer tone was marked as stressed 
by Bell's subjects, while the Welsh ultima is not stressed. However, in 
terms of such phenomena as intrinsic acoustic prominence, lack of vowel 
reduction, and vowel mutation, the ultima may clearly be said to have some 
degree of prominence, while not being stressed. In fact, at an earlier 
stage in the development of Welsh, the ultima was the stressed syllable in 
polysyllables (see section 4.3.1. for details). For the present, it is 
sufficient to note that the 'length pattern' mode of perception would 
characterise the ultima as the stressed syllable beginning a foot, while 
the 'interval pattern' mode would characterise the ultima as a prominent 
syllable within a foot begun by the non-acoustically-prominent penult. 
4.2.2 Subjective versus objective 
4.2.2. 1. For all sensory input 
Most studies of stress, for any language, have concentrated on 
identifying those features of speech production present in the acoustic 
signal that can be related directly to the mental perception of stress in 
the mind. This has led to the tendency to seek inherent acoustic cues of 
particular types which are then descibed as cues to stress that can be 
mapped one-to-one with stress perception. 
Such a view is both mechanical and unnecessary - mechanical, because it 
ignores the large part played by the human mind in the actual use of 
language; and unnecessary, because such a disregard for psychology is not 
needed in order to arrive at a watertight description of the phenomenon. 
It is not obvious why we should need to prove a one-to-one relation 
between the subjective and the objective aspects of stress; and indeed, 
such an insistence may even be harmful to our purposes, in that it could be 
leading the focus of research away from the true situation. 
In the case of hearing, seeing, etc. in general, what the brain perceives 
is very often dissimilar to the physical facts as measured by a machine. 
In the case of seeing, this is demonstated by cleverly-planned 'optical 
illusions'. In the case of heat perception, this is demonstrated by the 
old game of placing one arm in a bowl of hot water and the other in a bowl 
229 
of cold water; if both are then placed together in a bowl of lukewarm 
water, the first arm will feel cold and the second one warm. In the case 
of hearing, this is demonstrated by the way in which the ear 'telescopes' 
frequencies so that, at very high frequencies, a far greater change in 
frequency is needed to produce a given perceived pitch change than is 
needed at lower frequencies. It is also well known that our perception of 
pitch, loudness and length are not directly determined by Fo, intensity and 
duration respectively, but by a combination of the main cue with the 
others. The phenomenon of 'subjective rhythm', when the mind imposes a 
rhythm where there is none object i vely, is also seen in sensory input of 
all kinds; for example, the chugging of a train or the ticking of a clock 
(see Allen, G.D. 1975 for a discussion of work on subjective rhythm). 
Thus it is clear that, even without narrowing the field to the more 
special ised case of speech input, what the brain perceives need not be 
directly related to the physical facts of the situation . In fact, where 
there is a dicrepancy, this is usually in the interests of greater 
efficiency of perception. For example, most sounds that are important to 
us (such as speech sounds) lie in a restricted range of frequencies, and it 
is here that our frequency discrimination needs to be at its sharpest . 
For very high and very low frequencies, the blunting of discrimination 
ensures that no unnecessary effort is expended in making fine 
discriminations where they are not needed . Similarly, sounds at very high 
and very low frequencies need to have a much greater degree of intensity 
to be heard at the same loudness level as sounds of medium frequency, which 
are those most often encounered . 
4. 2.2. 2. For speech input 
Having established the lack of a consistent direct relationship 
between acoustic facts and perceived sounds in the case of sound input in 
general, it now remains to consider this relationship in the subset of 
sound input that is speech input. Here again, the brain seems to act as a 
'f11 ter', imposing a slightly different structure on the raw acoustic 
input . 
230 
Research on the perception of phonemes carried out by A. Liberman et al. 
(1963) showed that what is acoustically a series of equal step changes in 
locus frequency of the second formant transition is perceived i n category 
(phoneme) terms by native speakers . Also, they found that discrimination 
is greatest where it is most needed, at phoneme boundaries, and that it is 
least acute where there is least need for it, in the middle of the phoneme 
category. 
Similarly, the perception of rhythm also shows a bias in the case of 
speech stimuli as against non-speech stimuli . When listeners are 
presented with two sequences that differ in objective duration, whether 
the difference is perceived depends first of all on whether or not the 
stimulus is speech, since the difference limen for speech in this case is 
higher than that for non- speech stimuli. Thus it is more difficult to 
perceive a durational difference in the case of speech. Where the 
stimulus is speech and the objective difference is greater even than this 
higher threshold, a further safeguard is built in; listeners tend to 
impose subjective rhythm in the sense, here, of equalising dissimilar 
durations. Even if this fails, the duration difference may still go 
unperceived if a rhythmic momentum has been built up previously (see 
Lehiste 1977 for details of the perception of duration). Thus there is a 
bias towards the perception of speech as isochronous which ensures that 
quite large discrepancies on the objective level are simply not perceived. 
The conclusion is that a simple equating of acoustic cues with auditory 
percepts is inadequate, especially in the case of rhythm. The acoustic 
tendency towards isochrony is perhaps better seen as a cue to a 
psychological entity of subjective rhythm that is only partially realised 
at the objective level. This is not to decry the importance of the 
physical facts, but simply to deny them primacy in the definition of 
stress and to deny any simple relation between the subjective and the 
objective aspects of stress. 
231 
4.2.3 Function of cues 
Given such a situation, one may well be forgiven for wondering what 
part the inherent acoustic cues present in English actually play in the 
realisation of stress. One answer is given by Ladd (1980), whose 
formulation (cited in section 1.3.3.) is repeated here for convenience. He 
states that such acoustic measurements as Fo, duration, intensity, etc., 
'n.should not be interpreted as demonstrating the acoustic 
correlates of a particular stress peak, but rather as indicating the 
sorts of acoustic features which induce us to hear an overall 
rhythmic organization which includes the particular stress peak.' 
(Ladd 1980: 26 ) 
In other words, these cues trigger the realisation of a rhythmic 
pattern, in terms of which the stresses are then fitted in. In a sense, 
this strategy saves effort, in that the listener need not constantly be 'on 
the alert' for an inherentl y prominent syllable, but has his or her 
expectations primed by the perceived rhythm so that less attention need be 
paid at those points where the rhythm does not predict the occurrence of 
stress. An analogy may be drawn between this situation and that of 
pushing a child on a swing, where the pusher does not need to direct the 
motion of the swing continuousl~ but simply gives a short push at one 
particular point. Similarly, when ringing a tower bell in the English 
manner, it is not necessary to use great strength to control the swinging 
of the bell in a vertical circle; all that is needed is a short pull at 
the exact moment when the bell is almost at rest at the end of one circle, 
and gravity and momentum take care of the rest of that swing. In the same 
way, the speaker of a stress-timed language needs only to insert into the 
signal certain judiciously-timed cues, and the listener's rhythmic 
perception will supply the remainder, even making good the lack when a cue 
has not been suppl ied. Thus rhythm could be sen as functioning as a 
strategy for improving the efficiency of communication, by reducing effort 
for both speaker and hearer. 
232 
4.3 Historical development of stress in Welsh 
4.3.1 The Old Welsh Accent Shift 
4.3.1.1. Sound changes before the accent shift 
At some point in the early stages of its development, Welsh underwent 
the Old Welsh Accent Shift. This involved the shifting of word stress 
from the ultima to the penult in polysyllables, while stressed 
monosyllables remained stressed. The Welsh ultima had been the (stressed) 
penult in the parent language, British, but with the loss of word-endings 
and inflections that characterised the change from British to Primitive 
Welsh (in the late fifth to early sixth centuries A.D.), this syllable 
became the new ultima and retained its stress. 
The date of the later accent shift from ultima to penult is in some 
dispute; Kenneth Jackson (1953) places it in the mid-eleventh century, 
i.e. just before the change fr om Old Welsh to Middle Welsh, while Arwyn 
Watkins (1972a , 1972b) dates it much earlier, in the mid-ninth centur~ 
However, all scholars are agreed that the shift occurred, using as evidence 
various sound changes attested in manuscripts and inscriptions. The 
argument hinges on the fact that the earliest sound changes distinguish 
between final syllables and stressed monosyllables on the one hand, and 
non-final syllables and unstressed monosyllables on the other. Later 
sound changes, however, distinguish between final syllables and unstressed 
monosyllables on the one hand, and non-final syllables and stressed 
monosyllables on the other. The following sound changes date from before 
the accent shift. 
a) In ultimas and stres3ed monosyllables, long ~~ diphthongised to /aQ/, 
in the fifth to sixth centuries A.D.- e.g. British *diseus, 'cheese' > 
Primitive Welsh /k~ :s/ > Middle Welsh caws, /katO s/. 
b) In ultimas and stressed monosyllables, certain diphthongs became more 
open in their first element - i.e. ei>ai, (Oel» eel > ael (precise date 
unknown). For example, Old Welsh gueith, /gweIfJ / 'work' > Modern Welsh 
gwaith, /gwaIe/; O.W. esceir, /eske rr / 'leg, ridge' > Modern W. esgair 
233 
lesgarrl on the one hand, and O.W. *gueithiou Igwelejo ~/, 'works' > Mod. 
W. gweithiau Igweleja~/; O.W. douceint Id:> ~ke lnt/, 'forty' > Mod. W. 
deugain Ide~garnl on the other hand. 
c) In non- final syllables, certain vowel reductions took place in the mid 
to late sixth century. The short vowels changing were: Ir, ~ I > I::J I, 
and lul > 101; e.g. (British in{ssi, 'island' > ) O.W. in{s > Mid. W. and 
/ 
Mod. W. anis. 
4.~1 . ~ Sound changes after the accent shift 
It will be noted that sound changes occurring in ultimas and stressed 
monosyllables are of a 'strengthening' kind, while those occurring in non-
final syllables and stress less monosyllables are reductions. The 
situation is reversed later in the history of the language; a few 
examples are given below. 
a) In final syllables, but not in stressed monosyllables, la CJ I 
monophthongised to 101; .L e.g. British *Caratacos (a proper noun) > O.W. 
/ / / Caratauc > Middle Welsh Caradawc > Modern Welsh Caradog. 
b) Before final syllables, and before unstressed monosyllables, Ihl was 
lost; e.g. Mid . W. brenhin, 'king' > Mod. W. brenin, but Middle W. 
brenhines, 'queen' > Mod. W. brenhines. 
c) In final syllables and unstressed monosyllables, there is confusion 
between - n and -nn, also between - r and -rr, in texts from the eleventh 
century. In the same texts, there is no such confusion in non- final 
syllables and stressed monosyllables. The conclusion is that the new 
penul timate accent caused the reductions - nn > - n, - rr > - r, in newly 
unstressed syllables. Similarly, - nt becomes - n in these 
environments. 
One point of interest about the two above sets of sound changes is that 
the sound changes before the accent shift concern vowel quality rather 
than length, while those after the accent shift mainly concern vowel 
length, and consonant and syllable quantity. This may reflect a change in 
the nature of the accent, which some scholars view as having altered not 
only its position but also its realisation. 
234 
4.3. 1.3. Nature of the old accent and its remnants today 
A consideration of the phonetic nature of the Old Welsh accent may well 
shed some light on the situation in modern Welsh. The observation made at 
the end of section 4.3.1.2. gives a clue as to this phonetic nature. The 
old accent, or strategy for realising stress, seems to have made use 
principally of the cue of pitch, as well as unreduced vowel quality; these 
are seen in present-day ultimas and stressed monosyllables, and such cues 
are unlikely directly to influence vowel quantity. The Accent Shift, 
however, could have involved a shift in strategy away from pitch as the 
primary cue and towards the use of 'interval patterns' rather than 'length 
patterns' (see section 4.2.1.) and rhythm rather than inherent cues. Under 
such a strategy, unstressed syllables could still be pitch-prominent, 
since pitch was no longer a 'direct' stress cue but was solely concerned 
with intonation, while segmental length differences would become all-
important and vowel shortening would ensue in unstressed syllables. This 
is the situation at the present day, involving penults, and to a certain 
extent, it seems, stressed monosyllables. 
Some modern Welsh scholars make this distinction between the differing 
natures of the two types of accent. One early treatment of the old accent 
concl ud es that: 
'C'est un accent de hauteur qui n'influe pas sur la quantit~ des 
voyelles sur lesquelles il se porte •••• Cet accent de hauteur dev ient 
intensif en gallois moyen et vers le XIIIe _ XIvesiecle re'duit, 
surtout dans la prononciation, les diphtongues finales.' (Loth 1934) 
D.M. Jones (1949) remarks on the high pitch frequently heard on ultimas, 
and gives examples where penults are lost in rapid speech, stating that: 
'No doubt the frequently higher pitch of the final syllable plays a part in 
this process.' Whether it does so or not is still to be proven, but Jones, 
like Loth, links high pitch with the old accent, writing that the accent 
shift was not so much a shift of accent as a loss of the 'stress element' 
and a retention of the 'pitch element' in the case of final syllables. The 
penult, carrying only a 'stress element', is seen by Jones as having a 
stress, but not one of any great force, and he remarks on the notably small 
difference in stress between penults and ultimas. It is to be assumed 
that stressed monosyllables, in Jones' terms, retain both their 'pitch 
235 
element' and their' stress element'. 
A similar distinction is made by Watkins (1972a), who also remarks that 
present- day Welsh stress is very evenly distributed between syllables, 
'particularly as between penult and final'. He notes the higher pitch of 
the unstressed ultima in Welsh and also on immediately post- stress 
unstressed syllables in the English spoken by some native Welsh speakers. 
Watkins states that, in Old Welsh, stress was evenly distributed on all 
syllables of polysyllables (wh i ch, he writes, would explain the retention 
of Ihl and of the opposition between single and geminate 1nl and Irl in 
all syllables). The differences that developed between the vowels of 
final and pre- final syllables, according to Watkins, are attributable to 
the higher pitch of the ultima - this, again, needs to be proved. He 
writes that the accent shift was not so much a shift as a gradually-
developing stress on the penult, while higher pitch remained on the ultima. 
Watkins links this new penultimate stress with the opposition of vowel 
length, writing: 
'Yn gysylltiedig a phwysedd felly y mae'r cyferbyniad "hyd" a 
geir mewn Cymraeg llafar (fe'i ceir yn unig mewn unsillafion a 
sillafau gobennol).' (Watkins 1976: 404) ['The opposition of 
"length" which is found in spoken Welsh is therefore attributable to 
stress (being found only in monosyllables and penultimate 
syllables.'] 
On the other hand, he finds developments in the modern dialect of (Mm 
Ta we , subsequent to conventionally-accepted developments, which s eem to 
reflect the old accent: 
'Mae'r ffaith fod cyferbyniad ton rhwng sillafau ter fynol ac 
unsill ar y naill law a sillafau cynderfynol ar y llall yn un rheswm 
pam y mae'r proses ffono - morffig "gwyriad" ("vowel mutation") wedi 
parhau yn ffenomenon gynhyrchiol yn y system lafar Gymraeg.' 
(Watkins 1976:404) ['The fact that there is an opposition of pitch 
between final syllables and monosyllables on the one hand and pre-
final syllables on the other is a reason why the morphophonemic 
process of vowel mutation has remained a prod ucti ve phenomenon in 
the sound system of Welsh .'] 
He later states that this process is beg inning to be no longer 
productive in loan- words from Fnglish, and attributes this to the 
linguistic influence of English . Such an accusation may be unfounded, 
236 
since there is no reason not to suppose that these developments are the 
natural dying-out of the last remnants of the old accent that have 
remained in present-day Welsh. 
A similar view of the phonetic nature of the old accent is taken by A. 
Thomas, who writes that 
' ••• for Welsh, we may have to recognise two types of realization of 
accent: 
rhythmic stress on the penultimate syllable, 
pitch-prominence on the ultimate syllable. 
And the ultimate syllable is often (perceptually) the stronger of 
the two, and always structurally the stronger.' (A. Thomas 1979:170) 
While it may not be quite correct to accord both penult and ultima of 
the same word the status of 'stressed' (since stress is essentially 
cUlminative in function see section 4.4.5.2.), this observation 
nevertheless tallies with those quoted earlier. The consensus view seems 
to be that the old accent was signalled by pitch, the stressed ultima and 
stressed monosyllables hav ing a higher pitch, and that it caused vowel 
mutation (reduction in vowel quality) in unstressed syllables; while the 
new accent is signalled by rhythm and by vowel and consonant length, 
causing reduction in vowel quantity in unstressed syllables. At the same 
time, however, a remnant of the old accent is seen in the phenomenon of 
vowel mutation (which, however, may no longer be productive) and in the 
frequently higher pitch of the ultima. Given such a situation, one may be 
forgiven for thinking that penultimate stress is not very firmly 
established in Welsh, and so other evidence - of a non-linguistic type -
should also be considered. 
4.3.2 Penultimate stress; non-linguistic evidence 
4.3.2.1. Traditional opinion 
The general consensus of trad itional grammar-books has been that 
stress in Welsh is on the penult (e.g. Morris-Jones 1913, Rhys Jones 1977). 
This is supported by the judgements of native speakers in the experiments 
described in chapter 2 of the present study. This evidence is quite apart 
from the linguistic and methodological evidence presented in section 4.1., 
and for many would be the most convincing argument of all. Whatever may 
237 
be the phonetic prominence of the ultima, it seems to be outweighed by 
another factor determining stress. 
4.3.2.2. Music 
In Welsh songs, the penult is the syllable that falls on the beat of the 
music. Similarly, in Fnglish songs, it is the stressed syllable that falls 
on the beat, in the better kinds of choral underlay. Thus it seems that 
the penult is indeed the stressed syllable in Welsh, and this conclusion 
al so rests on ev idence of a rhythmic nature. 
4.3.3 Final stress; non-linguistic evidence 
4.3.3.1. Poetic measure 
On the other hand, some aspects of Welsh point towards a retention of 
some features of the old accent. For example, in Welsh poetry, the strict 
metres require a set number of syllables per line. This is similar to the 
French and Latin system of versification, rather than to the English and 
German system where merely a set number of feet per line is required, and 
the number of syllables may vary widely. Indeed, in earlier Welsh poetry, 
there is no concept of the 'foot' at all, since it does not enter into the 
extremely well-defined bardic rules for formal versification. It is only 
the more modern forms of verse (since the sixteenth century) that allow 
accentual composition in the sense of, for example, four or five accents or 
feet per line. Welsh poetry is extremely conservative, however, and this 
pattern of development may reflect a belated recognition of the nature of 
the new accent. The ex isting rules for 'syllable-timed' lines may be on 
the same level as vowel mutation; i.e. a remnant of an earlier stage of 
development which is no longer productive. 
4.3.3.2. Bardic rhyme rules 
In Welsh rhyming poetry, final syllables and stressed monosyllables 
carry the rhyme, despite the final syllables' supposed lack of stress. 
While penults may rhyme (though only with other penults), in such cases 
the respective final syllables also rhyme. Final syllables may rhyme with 
stressed monosyllables, but in more modern verse it seems that the vowel 
of the monosyllable is most often short and thus identical in quality to 
238 
that of the ultima. In earlier poetry, however, the most common pattern 
was a rhyme between an ultima and a stressed monosyllable, where vowel 
length was immaterial: e.g. gwenn Igw£n:l, 'white', in the compound meinwenn, 
Imarnwe-n:l, 'maiden', could rhyme with gwen, Igwe:n/, 'smile' (Loth 1900). 
The common pattern nowadays is either a final syllable rhyming with 
another final syllable, or (most commonly) a stressed monosyllable rhyming 
with another stressed monosyllable. Very rarely, a penult plus ultima may 
rhyme with ultima plus stressless enclitic. 
This very abbreviated summary nevertheless makes clear the pre-
eminence of the ultima over the penult in matters of rhyme. That such a 
si tuation can arise when the stress is supposedly on the penult is 
presumably due to the fact that the ultima is the more sonorous syllable, 
being longer and lacking schwa entirel y. 
4.3.3.3. "Cyng hanedd" 
A device much used in formal Welsh poetry is cynghanedd (approx. 
'consonant harmony', pronounced Ika~anE~ I). This can be very complicated, 
and has been elaborated into several narrowly-defined types; in essence, 
though, cynghanedd concerns consonants and their jud icious ordering to 
produce a pleasing effect of alliteration. For example, the consonants in 
one half of a line may be repeated in the same order in the second half, 
irrespective of word or morpheme boundaries. Such a device seems to 
disregard entirely the special status of the consonant after the stressed 
penult, treating this consonant in the same way as any other consonant. In 
this respect, at least, the 'new' accent seems immaterial in Welsh poetry: 
an accent that depends so crucially on the length of a particular type of 
consonant is not likel y thus to ignore it. 
4.3.3.4. "Gair cyrch" 
A poetic device concerning rhyme is the gair cyrch (approx. 'seeking 
word', pronounced Igair ki-rxl). This is a word at the end of the first 
line of a stanza, immediately after the rhyme-word. The gair cyrch rhymes 
not with the end of a line but (very often) with a word in the middle of 
the next line; this is a case where a stressed monosyllable must have an 
ultima as its rhyming word. Again, penultimate stress does not enter into 
239 
it. Even more intriguingl~ in the absence of linguistic stress on the 
ul tima, a special poetic dev ice continues in use that makes much of the 
syllables on which the old accent fell, while completely ignoring the 
syllables on which onl y the new accent fall s. 
4.3.3.5. "Accentuated cynghanedd" 
A blend of the old and the new appeared in the work of a seventeenth-
century Welsh poet, Huw Morus, who composed verses to be sung to tunes with 
a regular beat. As Parry writes, 
'In the traditional metres it was the type of cynghanedd used in 
each line that determined the rhythm of the line, and the charm of 
this kind of poetry is due, in no small measure, to the almost 
infinite variety of rhythms that cynghanedd makes possible. In the 
Huw Morus type of verse the rhythm of the line is, of course, 
determined by the tune, and the result is accentuated cynghanedd, 
which, as an exercise in versification, is perhaps more d ifficul t 
than the original system.' (Parry 1962:xiv-xv) 
The tunes used by Morus were often English, and thus had been composed 
for accentual verse rather than for the traditionally 'syllable-timed' 
Welsh verse. Parry notes two metrical developments resulting from this 
practice: 
'Firstly, the musical phrase was always very strictly observed 
and the words made to conform to the framework of the tune. Hence 
the intricate pattern of the stanzas. Secondly, cynghanedd was 
abundantly introduced, though it belonged traditionally to the 
strict metres and was, by its very accentuation, alien to the free 
metres. Full use was also made of rhyme to denote the end of 
musical phrases and even to mark a break in the phrase.' (Parry, OPe 
cit.:552) 
Unfortunatel y, Morus' successors were less skilled craftsmen in their 
fitting of words to a tune, and the genre of 'accentuated cynghanedd' never 
achieved the recognition of the traditional metres. It may perhaps be 
regarded as a transitional form between the purely 'syllable-timed' metre 
of the traditional bardic forms and the purely 'stress-timed' free metre 
that is becoming increasingly common nowadays. The latter type is seen 
both with and without cynghanedd or rhyme, and often approaches the timbre 
of English verse in its rhythm and its flexibility (which unkind critics 
would term looseness) of structure. It may be that the trad itional 
240 
metrical forms are onl y artificiall y kept al ive, preserv ing as they do in 
a petrified form certain features of the old accentual system, and that 
the newer metres are a reflection of the new accent which is destined to 
increase in influence even in this most conservative of fields in what is 
a most conservative language. 
4.4 Implications for the theory of stress 
4.4.1 'llWo trends 
4.4.1.1. Statistical basis 
In the experimental work described in chapter 2, two trends were 
discovered in relation to stress in Welsh. These may be termed trends 
towards 'syllable-timing' and 'stress-timing'. The intriguing finding is 
that it is the weaker trend statistically speaking (towards 'stress-
timing') which is the determiner of stress in the modern language. In such 
a situation, it is necessary to consider not the absolute lengths of units, 
but the direction in which changes in leng th are made; the model must be a 
kinetic rather than a static one. As Barnwell writes (see page 19 of this 
study), what is heard as indisputably rhythmic 'may be really the 
interpretation of changes in duration in the direction of true rhythm' 
(Barnwell 1971:88). Similarly, Classe sees isochrony as an undercurrent 
phenomenon rather than one manifested on the sur face, wri ting 
' ... frequently, it only remains as an 
some other factor at times almost 
effects' (Classe 1939:90). 
4.4.1.2. The situation in English 
underlying tendency of which 
completely obliterates the 
In English, these two trends may also be discerned, though their 
relationship may well be different from their relationship for Welsh. The 
syllable defined as stressed according to rhythmic factors, in English, is 
also the only syllable eligible for pitch-prominence: herein lies the 
crucial difference between English and Welsh. The lack of mismatch in the 
syllables picked out by these two factors makes for a less confusing 
241 
situation, certainly, but it also carries with it the danger that stress 
and pitch could be viewed as the same phenomenon, when, in fact, they must 
be defined separately (see in particular section 1.2.4.1.). 
This lack of mismatch, therefore, could be one reason why the 
independence of stress from pitch has sometimes not been recognised; 
since most wor k is carr ied out on English, it is natural for the results 
thus obtained to be assumed to apply also to other languages with 
seemingly similar features. It is here that Welsh comes into its own, 
pointing out the separateness of stress and pitch by being the exception 
that spotlights assumptions. 
4.4.1.3. The situation in Wel sh 
In modern Welsh, stress is based on rhythm, the pulse being marked out 
by segmental durational features. However, there remain certain features 
of the older accent, which seems to have been based on pitch alone. While 
these latter features seem to be no longer productive, their presence in 
the modern language makes the stress situation somewhat complicated and 
can also interfere with intonational patterns. While the old accent 
preserved the quality of stressed vowels, the new accent frequently alters 
vowel quality (simultaneously with vowel length) and can even fall on the 
completely reduced vowel, schwa - clearly vowel quality is not an 
important part of the new accent system. Instead, what remnants there are 
of the old accent are allowed free rein with vowel mutation and retention 
of the ultima when the penult is dropped (when weakly stressed); it is 
likely that such latitude is possible precisely because vowel quality has 
no bearing on the new accent, and thus cannot 'threaten' it directly. 
On the other hand, vowel and consonant length are crucial to the 
realisation of the new accent, and it is clear that the penult is master 
here; the vowel leng th rules, and consonant leng then ing and 
shortening/cluster simplification, point to the prominence of the penult 
at the expense of the ultima. Thus, while the prominence of the ultima may 
condition the quality changes that constitute vowel mutation, these 
changes never affect the length of the mutated vowels; this is reserved 
for changes conditioned by the penult alone . 
242 
The present state of the language offers a rich field for research into 
stress, particularly as the situation seems fluid. The vowel mutation 
process is no longer productive, according to Watkins (1976:405), while the 
penultimate stress is not ' strong enough to prevent some English words 
being loaned with their original stressing unchanged (Watkins 1972a). It 
will be interesting to observe which stress system eventually wins the day 
in Welsh. 
4.4.2 Stress accent and pitch accent 
4.4.2.1. Conclusions for Welsh 
The general conclusions obtained from the experimental work described 
in chapter 2 are two in number, as has been outl ined in section 2.4.2.; 
they will merely be summarised here. 
The first conclusion is that stress must be defined independently of 
intonation, or indeed of any pitch phenomena at all. This is an obvious 
feature of Welsh: the pitch-prominence of the unstressed syllable was 
noted by several earlier scholars, who nevertheless felt no need to 
relocate 'stress' on the syllable thus defined as prominent. In effect, 
they were defining stress on separate ground s, as have trad itional 
grammar- books and the present study. The perceptual experiments in 
section 2.~ present evidence against defining stress purely in terms of 
pitch-prominence, while the theoretical apparatus developed in chapter 3 
presents a descriptive framework within which stress and intonation may 
remain essentially separate while interacting in certain closely-defined 
ways. 
The second conclusion is that the independent basis of the definition 
of stress in Welsh is rhythm. This conclusion is not as immediately 
obvious as the first, but is the only one possible given the evidence 
presented in chapter 2. The second conclusion augments the first, in that 
pitch and duration are essentially different acoustic phenomena which 
have no great influence on each other in the natural course of events; 
thus the separation of stress and intonation on the linguistic level is 
seen to rest on a similar clear separation on the phonetic level, and the 
ex planation is thereby considerabl y simplified. 
243 
4.4.2.2. Conclusions for English 
While this study has been conducted in terms of Welsh, it is naturally 
hoped that some at least of its conclusions will prove to be applicable to 
other languages also, particularly English . In the case of the first 
conclusion (that stress is to be defined separately from intonation) there 
is alread y a precedent for English, in the shape of the trad itional 
'British' and 'American' schools of thought on suprasegmentals. These both 
view stress as separate from intonation, though they place their emphasis 
differently, and in this they are distinguished from the 'accent' analyses, 
such as that of Bolinger, which seeks to define stress in terms of pitch 
movement. The new 'metrical' theory of stress likewise separates stress 
and intonation, and finds that the theoretical description of each is 
simplified by so doing. Thus the first conclusion, formulated for Welsh, 
can equally well be applied to English. 
The second conclusion (that stress is to be defined in terms of rhythm) 
is probably applicable to English also. This, however, rests at the moment 
on assertions of 'subjective isochrony' for English which are in need of 
somewhat more rigorous experimentation. The metrical theory finds it 
theoretically more elegant to view English stress in terms of rhythm. It 
may well be that the 'pulse' in English is marked by intensity rather than 
by the segmental durational features used in Welsh; however, this is a 
minor point not central to the question of whether the rhythm exists. For 
the present, it must be concluded that, while it seems likely that stress 
in English is based on rhythm, there is a need for more empirical research 
on this point . 
4.4.3 'llhe notion 0 f stress 
4.4.3. 1. Form 
What is termed 'stress' may take different forms in different languages, 
or in different historical stages of the same language. The form need not 
necessarily be inherent acoustic cues, as has been largely assumed up to 
now. A distinction is often drawn between 'stress accent' and 'pitch 
accent', the former viewed as prominence (of one syllable per word) based 
on intensity, and the latter viewed as this prominence based on pitch. 
244 
This distinction may well still be useful, and can help draw a distinction 
between stress in languages such as French (pitch accent) and languages 
such as English (stress accent). On the other hand, the terms are 
mislead ing in that 'stress accent' may cover more than one strategy for 
real ising stress, as has been seen: it may refer to intensity or to 
rhythm, and also to both together or possibly to yet another factor. 
4.4. 3.2. Function 
The essential function of stress seems to be to denote 'prominence' in 
some sense related to semantic importance in the particular context. As 
Hyman (1977, 'On the nature of linguistic stress') writes, the cUlminative 
function of 'stress accent' was emphasised as a definitional requirement 
by European phonologists such as Trubetzkoy; Jakobson, Martinet, and Garde. 
The basic principles of a stress language, he states, are that only one 
syllable per word will receive primary stress, so that each stress signals 
a separate word (or other accentual unit) and, it is claimed, acts as an 
aid in processing utterances (Hyman, OPe cit.:38). An y function that 
stress may have in facilitating the processing of utterances has yet to be 
investigated fully; for the moment it will suffice to define stress as a 
property of the word, assigned in the lexicon to a particular syllable of 
that word . This syllable then constitutes a potential locus for the 
phonetic manifestation of accent. Factors such as rate of speech, given 
and new information, and surface syntactic structure may determine whether 
or not the stressed syllable is actually accented. Hyman describes the 
relationship between stress and accent in the following terms: 
' ••• stress is an underlying mental phenomenon, which however must 
somehow be picked up by the hearer. I therefore choose to regard 
the above perceptual cues as "strateg ies" for the real ization of 
stress.' (Hyman, OPe cit.:40) 
It is quite possible, as has been seen, for 'strategies' to vary from 
language to language (e.g. English versus French), or even from an earlier 
state of a language to a later state (as happened in Welsh). While the 
form taken by stress in Welsh has changed, its function has not, in that it 
is still a cUlminative word- based phenomenon. It is a mistake to attempt 
to define stress solely in terms of its form, as has been the general rule 
to date; Welsh points out this fallacy clearly. Thus, in the definition 
245 
and description of stress, it is also necessary to take account of the 
functional and semantic aspects, and this is what has been attempted in 
the present study. 
4.4.4 Uncertainty in the description of stress 
4.4.4.1. What? 
When examining stress in a given language, one cannot be certain what 
the realisation of stress will be. Synchronically, this realisation can 
differ between two languages, while diachronically it can differ between 
two historical stages of the same language. Thus it is a mistake to begin 
such an examination with assumptions concerning the likely nature of 
stress. This is seen clearly in the case of Welsh; if a researcher were 
to assume from the outset that stress would be realised by high pitch and 
pitch glides, as is the case in English, then the results would be 
completely in error. It is necessary to take into account other 
phenomena, such as sound changes, morphological processes, and vowel and 
consonant length rules, since stress is a feature of language that has 
repercussions on many levels of the linguistic analysis. 
4.4.4.2. When? 
The present anal ysis has been del iberatel y flex ible, attempting to 
incorporate a probabilistic element into the theoretical framework. This 
is in contrast to the 'always/never' approach of traditional descriptions, 
the rig id ity of which could become a barrier to greater elegance of 
description . Often, one cannot with certainty predict when a particular 
rule will apply; for example, whether or not a 2- column in the metrical 
grid will count as stressed. It is true that the probabilistic element in 
this theoretical framework is but crudely sketched in as yet; however, 
the principle is there, and it is hoped that development along these lines 
will lead to a closer approximation to the truth of the situation . 
4.4.4.3. Why? 
It seems that at some point in its historical development, the Welsh 
language changed its strategy of stress realisation . We do not know why 
it did so; moreover, we cannot even be sure what kind of factor to look 
246 
for as a cause of such change. One might attempt to 'explain' the change 
in terms of the influence of English; but this is a mere relocation of the 
problem, and would be implausible if the 'explanation' were formulated in 
terms of a cognitive shift 'in the mode of perception from 'length patterns' 
to 'interval patterns', since the latter clearly do not occur in English. 
If the 'cognitive shift' theory were espoused, one would still be hard put 
to it to find a catal yst for such a shift, when nothing comparable seems to 
have occurred in neighbouring languages of the same fami! y. 
It is perhaps a mistake to expect a very high degree of regularity in 
linguistic 'explanation'; languages are the creation of people, and people 
are notoriously irregular. In fact, a too-rigid formulation may lead the 
investigation away from language itself and nearer to the more abstract 
realms of speculative logic - which is an admirable pursuit, certainly, but 
not one that can be the primary concern of linguists, whose professed task 
is to search for and explain, if possible, the regularities and 
irregularities that occur in language as it actually is and not as some 
may consider it ought to be. 
247 
REFERENCES 
ABERCROMBIE, L. 1923 Principles of English prosody. London: Seeker. 
ADAMS, D. 1980 The Restaurant at the End of the Universe . London: Pan Books 
Ltd. 
ALLEN, G.D. 1975 Speech rhythm: its relation to performance universals and 
articulatory timing. Journal of Phonetics, 3: 75-86. 
ALLEN, M.R. 1975 Vowel Mutation and Word Stress in Welsh. Linguistic 
Inquiry, 6: 181-201. 
ALLEN, W.S. 1973 Accent and rhythm. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer sity Press. 
BARNWELL, T.P. 1971 An algorithm for segment durations in reading machine 
context. Technical Report 479. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I. T. Research Laboratory 
of Electronics. 
BELL, A. 1977 Accent Placement and Perception of Prominence in Rhythmic 
Structures. In Hyman (ed.) 1977. 
BLOOMFIELD, L. 1933 Language. New York: Holt; London: Allen and Unwin, 1935. 
BOLINGER, D.L. 1958 A Theory of Pitch Accent in English. Word, 14: 109-149. 
BOLINGER, D.L. 1965 Pitch Accent and Sentence Rhythm. In I. Abe & T. Kanekujo 
(eds.): Forms of English: Accent, Morpheme, Order. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press. 
BOLINGER, D.L. 1972 Accent is predictable (if you're a mind-reader). 
Language, 48: 633-644. 
BUXTON, H. 1983 Temporal Predictability in the Perception of English 
Speech. In A. Cutler & D.R. Ladd (eds. ) Prosody: Models and Measurements. 
Berl in: Springer-Verlag. 
CATFORD, J. C. 1968 Articulatory possibilities of man. In Malmberg (ed.) 
1968. 
248 
CHOMSKY, N. 1970 Deep structure, surface structure and semantic 
interpretation. In 0.0. Steinberg & L.A. Jakobovits (eds.) 1971 Semantics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
CHOMSKY, N. & HAll.E, M. 1968 The Sound Pattern of English. New York: Harper & 
Row. 
CLASSE, A. 1939 The Rhythm of English Prose. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
CRYSTAL, D. 1969 Prosod ic systems and intonation in Engl ish. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
EVANS, D.S. 1964 A Grammar of Middle Wel she Ox ford: Dublin Institute for 
Advanced Studies. 
FRY, D.B. 1958 Experiments in the perception of stress. Language and Speech, 
1: 126-152. 
FRY, D.B. 1968 Prosodic phenomena. In Malmberg (ed.) 1968. 
GIMSON, A.C. 1956 The Linguistic Relevance of Stress in English. 
Zeitschrift fUr Phonetik und allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft, 9: 143-149. 
GIMSON, A.C. 1962 An Introduction to the Pronunciation of English. London: 
Arnold. 
GRIFFEN, T.D. 1979 On Phonological Stress in Welsh. Bulletin of the Board of 
Celtic Studies, XXVIII: 206-212. 
HYMAN, L.M. (ed.) 1977 Studies in Stress and Accent. Southern California 
Occasional Papers in Linguistics, 4. Dept. of Linguistics, University of 
Southern California. Los Angeles, California. 
HYMAN, L.M. 1977 On the nature of linguistic stress. In Hyman (ed.) 1977. 
JACKSON, K.H. 1953 Language and History in Early Britain. Edinburgh. 
JONES, D. 1950, 3rd edn. The Pronunciation of English. Cambridge: Cambridge 
Uni versity Press. 
249 
JONES, D.M. 1949 The Accent in Modern Welsh. Bulletin of the Board of Celtic 
Studies, XIII: 63-64. 
JONES, M. & THOMAS, A.R. 1977 ' The Welsh language: studies in its syntax and 
semantics. University of Wales Press for the Schools Council. 
JONES, R.O. 1967 A structural phonological analysis and comparison of three 
Welsh dialects. University College of North Wales, Bangor: unpublished M.A. 
dissertation. 
KINGDON, R. 1958 The Groundwork of English Stress. London: Longmans. 
LADD, D.R. 1980 The Structure of Intonational Meaning. Bloomington and 
London: Indiana University Press. 
LADEFOGED, P. 1967 Three Areas of Ex perimental Phonetics. London: Ox ford 
University Press. 
LADEFOGED, P. 1975 A Course in Phonetics. New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jov anov ich. 
LEHISTE, 1. 1970 Suprasegmentals. Cambridge, Mass.: M. I . T. Press . 
LEHISTE, I. 1975a The syllable nucleus as a unit of timing. Proceedings of 
the Eleventh International Congress of Linguists. Bologna - Florence, 1972. 
L. Heilman, (ed . ) Pp. 929-932. Societa ed itrice il Mulino Bologna. 
LEHISTE, I. 1975b The perception of duration within sequences of four 
intervals. Paper presented at the Eighth International Congress of 
I 
Phonetic Sciences, Leeds, August 21. 
LEHISTE, I. 1977 Isochrony reconsidered. Journal of Phonetics, 5: 253 - 263. 
LIBERMAN, A.M., COOPER, F.S., HARRIS, K.S., MACNEILAGE, P.F., & STUDDERT-
KENNEDY, M. 1963 A motor theory of speech perception. Proceedings of the 
Speech Communication Seminar, Stockholm 1962. Stockholm: RIT. 
LIBERMAN, M. Y. 1975 The intonational system of English. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Cambridge, Mass. Reproduced by Ind iana University 
Linguistic s Cl ub, June 1978. 
250 
LIBERMAN, M.Y. & PRINCE, A. 1977 On Stress and Linguistic Rhythm. Linguistic 
Inquiry, 8: 249-336. 
LIEBERMAN, P. 1960 Some acoustic correlates of word stress in American 
English. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 32: 451-454. 
LIEBERMAN, P. 1965 On the Acoustic Basis of the Perception of Intonation by 
Linguists. Word, 21: 40-54. 
LIEBERMAN, P. 1967 Intonation, Perception, and Language. Cambridge, Mass.: 
M. I. T. Press. Research Monograph No. 38. 
LOTH, J. 1900 La M~trique Galloise: Introduction au Livre Noir de 
Carmarthen et aux vieux poemes gallois. Paris: Ancienne Librairie Thorin 
et fil s. 2 vols. Appears as H. d'Arbois de Jubainv ille, Cours de Li tte"rature 
Cel tique, no. 9. 
" LOTH, J. 1934 Remarques a l' "Historia Britonum" dite de Nennius (suite). 
Revue Celtique, 51: 1-31. 
MALMBERG, B. 1963 Phonetics. New York: Dover. 
MALMBERG, B. (ed.) 1968 Manual of Phonetics. Amsterdam: North-Holland 
Publ ishing Compan y. 
MORRIS-JONES, J. 1913 A Welsh Grammar. Oxford. 
O'CONNOR, J.D. & ARNOLD, G.F. 1961, 2nd edn. 1973. Intonation of Colloquial 
Engl ish: A practical handbook. London: Longmans. 
O'CONNOR, J.D. & TRIM, J.L.M. 1953 Vowel, consonant and syllable - a 
phonological definition. Word, 9: 103-122. 
OHALA, J.J. 1977 The Physiology of Stress. In Hyman (ed.) 1977. 
BHMAN, S. & LINDQVIST, J. 1966 Anal ysis-by-synthesis of prosod ic pitch 
contours. Speech Transmission Laboratory QJarterly Progress and Status 
Report, 4/1965: 1-6. Stockholm, Sweden. 
251 
PALMER, H.E. & BLANDFORD, W.G. 1924 A Grammar of Spoken English on a Strictly 
Phonetic Basis. Cambridge: W. Heffer & Sons. 
PARRY, T. Ced.) 1962 The Oxford Book of Welsh Verse. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
PIKE, K.L. 1945 The Intonation of American English. Ann Arbor, Mich.: 
University of Michigan Press. 
RAPP, K. 1971 A study of syllable timing. Speech Transmission Laboratory 
Quarterly Progress and Status Report, 1: 14-19. Stockholm, Sweden. 
REES, J.M. 1977 Aspects of Welsh intonation. University of Edinburgh: 
unpublished doctoral dissertation. 
RHYS JONES, T.J. 1977 Living Welsh. London: Hodder and Stoughton Ltd. 
SELKIRK, E.O. 1980a The Role of Prosodic Categories in English Word Stress. 
Linguistic Inquiry, 11: 563 - 605. 
SELKIR K, E.O. 1980b On Prosodic Structure and its Relation to Syntactic 
Structure. Unpublished paper presented to the Sloan Workshop on the Mental 
Representation of Phonology, University of Massachusetts, November 18- 19, 
1978. Reproduced by Indiana University Linguistics Cl ub, 1980. 
SHEN, Y. & PETERSON, G.G. 1962 Isochronism in English. University of Buffalo, 
Studies in Linguistics, Occasional Papers, 9: 1- 36. 
SOMMERSTEIN, A.H. 1977 Modern Phonology. London: Arnold . 
STETSON, R.H. 1928 Motor Phonetics. Amsterdam: North- Holland Publishing 
Company. 
SWEET, H. 1878 Handbook of phonetics. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
THOMAS, A. 1979 A lowering rule for vowels and its ramifications, in a 
dialect of North Welsh. In: Occasional papers in linguistics and language 
learning, no. 6: Papers in Celtic Phonology. The New University of Ulster. 
252 
THOMAS, C.H. 1967 Welsh Intonation - A Preliminary Study. Studia Celtica, 2: 
8-28. 
THOMPSON, H.S. 1980 Stress' and Salience in English: Theory and Practice. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation: Palo Alto Research Center, California. 
TRAGER, G.L. & SMITH, H.L. Jr. 1951 An outline of English structure. Studies 
in Linguistics, Occasional Papers, 3. Washington: American Council of 
Learned Societies; Norman, Ckla.: Battenburg Press. 
VANDERSLICE, R. 1967 Larynx versus lungs: cricothyrometer data refuting 
some recent claims concerning intonation and archetypal ity. Working Papers 
in Fhonetics, University of California at Los Angeles, 7: 69-79. 
VAN KATWIJK, A. 1974 Accentuation in Qltch. An experimental linguistic 
study. Utrecht. [Cited by Chala 1977.] 
WATKINS, T.A. 1953 The Accent in Cwm Tawe Welsh. Zeitschrift fUr Celtischer 
Philologie, XXIV: 6-9. 
WATKINS, T.A. 1972a The Accent in Old Welsh - its Q..Iality and Development. 
BUlletin of the Board of Celtic Studies, XXV: 1-11. 
WATKINS, T.A. 1972b The Accent-Shift in Old Welsh. In H. Pilch & J. Thurow 
(eds.) Indo-Celtica: Gedl!chtnisschrift fUr Alf Sommerfelt. pp. 201-205. In 
series: Commentationes Societatis Linguisticae Europaeae. Munich: Max 
Hueber Verlag. 
WATKINS, T.A. 1976 Cyfnewidiadau Seinegol sy'n Gysylltiedig aIr 'Acen' 
Gymraeg. BUlletin of the Board of Cel tic Studies, XXVI: 399-405. 
WILLIAMS, B.J. 1980 Some features of modern Welsh intonation. Unpublished 
MS. 
WILLIAMS, B.J. In press. An approach to the Welsh vowel system. Bulletin of 
the Board of Celtic Stud ies, May 1984 edn. 
UN~ITY 
LIBRARY 
CAMBRIDOE 
