To appear in Adam Jardine & Paul de Lacy (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Phonology (2e.)
DRAFT | version date: April 1, 2025

Loanword Phonology
       Jennifer L. Smith
       University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

1. Introduction
This chapter addresses basic concepts, research topics, and key proposals concerning loanword
phonology, as well as some of the implications that loanwords and loanword adaptation have for
fundamental questions in phonological theory. After a brief historical overview in section 2, the
chapter focuses primarily on contributions to experimental and theoretical work published after
2011, subsequent to the extensive review of loanword phonology by Kang (2011; see also Kang
2013 for an annotated bibliography) and the theoretical and methodological overview by Paradis &
LaCharité (2011). Section 3 discusses non-phonological factors that influence loanword phonology:
phonetics and perception, orthography, and social context. Section 4 reviews recent applications of
loanword phonology as evidence in phonological theory. Conclusions are presented in section 5.
      Before beginning a discussion of the role of loanword phonology in phonological theory,
however, it is important to clarify what is meant by the terms loanword and loanword phonology.

1.1 Loanwords: From source language to borrowing language
A loanword can be defined as a word introduced to one language, the borrowing language or Lb, from
another language, the source language or Ls. This discussion focuses specifically on loanwords
whose phonological shape (or an approximation thereof) is introduced into Lb along with its
meaning. Such phonological loanwords can be distinguished from the class of borrowings called
semantic loans, calques, or loan translations, in which pre-existing Lb morphemes are used to express
a borrowed concept that is the translation of an Ls form or expression. Loanwords must also be
distinguished from code-switches, defined by Poplack (2018: chapter 1) as “alternation[s...] of
stretches of one language with stretches of another, each retaining the morphology, syntax, and
optionally the phonology” of its language of origin. How, and even whether, to distinguish borrowing
from code-switching has been controversial, but Poplack argues that any form that is
morphosyntactically integrated into Lb is not a code-switch, even if it is a novel or one-time
borrowing.


                                                   1
      In some cases, a loanword includes phonological structures or sequences that are identical (or
at least similar) to aspects of the Ls source form but are not found in the non-loan phonology of Lb,
as when English speakers produce the name Bach with a final velar fricative [x] corresponding to the
German source form; such non-native structures are said to be imported (Haugen 1950). In other
cases, some or all non-Lb-like phonological structures or sequences are brought into conformity with
the Lb phonological system, as when English speakers produce the word tempura, borrowed from
Japanese [tempɯɾa], with a rhotic approximant [ɹ] replacing the Ls tap [ɾ], a rounded [u] replacing
the Ls unrounded [ɯ], a reduced [ə] replacing the Ls low central [a], and a word stress (on [u]). Such
differences between the Lb and Ls shapes of a loanword are known as adaptations or nativizations.
The mechanisms by which loanwords are adapted are complex and have been the subject of much
research and debate (section 3).
      In summary, the term loanword is used in this chapter to refer to a word introduced to Lb from
Ls, whose sound shape is based on that of Ls (possibly subject to adaptation), and which is not a
code-switch.

1.2 Loanword phonology: Established loanwords versus loanword adaptation
The term loanword phonology has been used to refer to two different, though related, phenomena.
Sometimes this term refers to phonological generalizations about established, lexicalized loanwords
in Lb, often with a focus on how the phonology of such loanwords compares, either to the L s-internal
phonology of the source words, or to the non-loan phonology of Lb. Loanword-specific phonological
patterns can involve a variety of aspects, including phoneme inventory, phonotactic restrictions,
prosodic structure, or phonological alternations.
      In other cases, the term loanword phonology is used in reference to loanword adaptation, the
phonological (though see also section 3) changes that accompany the real-time introduction of a
new loan from Ls into Lb.
      These two aspects can also become intermingled, because even loanwords that are now
established must have been borrowed for the first time at some point. In addition, generalizations
concerning the phonology of established loanwords can become conventionalized within the L b
community, leading to predictable or systematic strategies for adapting newly introduced loanwords
(section 3.3).
      In this chapter, loanword adaptation will be distinguished from phonological generalizations
over established loanwords where maintaining the distinction is relevant, and the more general term



                                                    2
loanword phonology will be used where considering both aspects together is useful, or where the
two cannot easily be disentangled.

2. A brief history of loanword phonology
Figure 1 summarizes the usage of the terms loanword phonology and loanword adaptation in the
“English 2024” Google Books corpus, using the Google Ngrams tool (Michel et al. 2011). The search
results are reported as a percentage of all bigrams (two-word phrases) in the “English 2024” corpus
for each year in the range; because these values are very small, the y-axis scale in Figure 1 is
multiplied by 1,000,000,000 for clarity. The results of this simple corpus search provide some
general context for the discussion in this chapter, although these usage counts are not a direct
measure of the rate of occurrence of the search terms in academic publications.




      Figure 1. Google Ngrams results for loanword adaptation and loanword phonology in the
         "English 2024" corpus (no smoothing). From [http://books.google.com/ngrams].

      The corpus results show a small amount of activity for loanword phonology beginning in the
late 1940s, then there is an uptick around 1975, followed by another increase around 1995, with a
maximum around 2006. Similarly, loanword adaptation shows activity starting in the late 1960s,
with a peak around 2008. The term loanword phonology is more common at first, but loanword
adaptation catches up around 2000 and becomes the more commonly used of the two after that.
      The uptick in the use of these terms in the 1970s corresponds, chronologically, to an interest
in loanword data as external evidence for phonological grammars and as evidence for or against



                                                    3
particular theoretical proposals in early generative phonology (section 2.2). The increase in the
1990s lines up with the development of Optimality Theory and other constraint-based approaches,
which reconsidered some fundamental assumptions about the nature of the phonological grammar,
making evidence from loanwords relevant in new ways (section 2.3). The emerging preference for
the term loanword adaptation co-occurs with an increased interest in determining the degree to
which factors beyond the Lb phonological grammar, especially phonetic similarity and perceptual
illusions (section 3.1), contribute to the differences in phonological shape between loans in L b and
their Ls source forms.
      Although the most recent years show fewer instances of both search terms than at their peaks
around 2006–2008, interest in loanword phonology and loanword adaptation continues. With
appropriate attention to non-phonological factors (section 3), and the incorporation of a variety of
methodologies (section 4.1), evidence from loanwords continues to bear on our understanding of
the phonological grammar and its interfaces with phonetic, orthographic, and social factors.

2.1 Haugen (1950)
One of the first systematic discussions of loanwords and loanword phonology is that by Haugen
(1950), who sets out to establish fundamental concepts and terminology related to linguistic
borrowing and to posit general hypotheses about the process of borrowing and its linguistic and
social context.
      Haugen is primarily interested in loanwords and their properties as a means to investigate the
process of linguistic borrowing itself. This perspective stands in contrast to that of later generations
of researchers who would consider the role of loanword phonology as a source of evidence about
broader aspects of human language and cognition. Nevertheless, in the course of his discussion,
Haugen identifies a number of issues and questions that are still of current interest. For example, he
distinguishes between adaptation (which he calls “substitution”) and importation in the phonology
of loanwords, and he hypothesizes that lower proficiency in Ls leads to more adaptation of non-Lb
phonological structures. He also observes that patterns seen in loanwords can be gradiently foreign
rather than falling on either side of a well-defined boundary between native and foreign. He flags
orthographic influence as a potential complicating factor in loanword phonology. Additionally,
Haugen notes that speakers' use of established loanwords is not strictly the same phenomenon as
the initial process of borrowing, but he suggests that patterns in established loans can nevertheless
shed light on that initial process.



                                                   4
2.2 Loanwords in early generative phonology
With the development of generative phonology came both an interest in using loanword phonology
as a source of external evidence for proposals about the phonological grammar of a particular
language, and exploration of the theoretical implications of languages with loanword-specific
phonological patterns.
      Hyman (1970a, b) is one of the first to emphasize that loanwords can provide an important
source of what would come to be known as substantive or external evidence in phonology (Kiparsky
1982 [1971]; Skousen 1972; Botha 1973; Zwicky 1975; Churma 1979), defined by Zwicky (1975) as
any source of data bearing on the phonological grammar beyond morpheme alternations and
patterns of phonological distribution. Hyman takes the position that, if the goal of linguistic analysis
is no longer merely a description of the patterns observed in a language, but rather a model of the
generative linguistic system of the language itself, then external evidence becomes necessary for
deciding between multiple possible phonological analyses of a language. Hyman’s discussion
focuses on loanword adaptation (and the perception of foreign forms more generally) as one source
of external evidence. He argues that, if a posited phonological rule can be shown to apply to an L s
form when it is adapted to Lb, this shows that the rule is productive and thus is a psychologically real
part of the phonological grammar of Lb.
      Also of interest in early generative phonology were lexical strata — lexical subclasses with
distinct phonological properties that arise when Ls structures are imported rather than adapted,
leading to phonological contrasts or syllable structures that are permitted only in loanwords. In a
rule-based framework, this motivates rules or exceptions that must apply to entire subsets of the
lexicon (Chomsky & Halle 1968; Kiparsky 1968; Saciuk 1969).

2.3 Loanword phonology in constraint-based models
Although loanword phonology can be a source of external evidence for phonological grammars, it
also presents complications for a rule-based phonological model. The development of constraint-
based frameworks such as Optimality Theory (OT; Prince & Smolensky 2004 [1993]) and the Theory
of Constraints and Repair Strategies (TCRS; Paradis & LaCharité 1997, 2011) allowed new
perspectives on some of these issues.
      One problem is that a rule-based analysis of loanword phonology can require multiple formal
devices that derive the same surface pattern — a situation known as a conspiracy or a duplication
problem (Kisseberth 1970; Clayton 1976), often viewed as the sign of a missed generalization. For



                                                   5
example, consider a language with no surface onset clusters, but also with no morphological
alternations overtly resolving onset clusters, because no potential clusters happen to occur in
monomorphemic URs or in morpheme combinations. In a classic rule-based approach, the absence
of URs with potential clusters would be modeled by means of a morpheme-structure condition
(Stanley 1967) prohibiting such structures in lexical entries. Now suppose that the same language
has a process of epenthesis into onset clusters in loanword adaptation (and that the epenthesis is
phonological; see section 3.1.2). This adaptation process would serve as external evidence that the
onset-cluster prohibition is productive in Lb. And yet, the phonological analysis of this language
must now include an epenthesis rule that is needed only for loanwords, and moreover such a rule
forms a conspiracy with the morpheme-structure condition that is needed to account for the
absence of onset clusters in non-loan forms. (See Stampe (1973) for more on problems raised by
loanword adaptation for Chomsky & Halle’s (1968) approach to morpheme-structure conditions.)
      The picture is different in a constraint-based model. If the phonological grammar consists of,
not a series of ordered rules, but a hierarchy of output constraints, then loanword adaptation is
actually expected, even in the absence of active alternations in the non-loan phonology. To continue
the example from above, if an onset-cluster prohibition is productive in Lb, then a constraint against
onset clusters (*COMPLEXONSET) dominates at least one of the faithfulness constraints that would
protect any potential complex onset that might arise (Smolensky 1996). This high rank for
*COMPLEXONSET automatically predicts that onset clusters are avoided in loanwords.
      In OT and related frameworks, then, patterns of loanword adaptation can be seen as external
evidence not only for the productivity of a particular phonological process, but more specifically for
the presence of a high-ranking constraint in the grammar of a language. Early approaches to
loanword phonology in constraint-based models often emphasize this line of thinking: see, for
example, Yip (1993); Paradis (1995); Paradis & LaCharité (1997); Broselow (2000); Jacobs &
Gussenhoven (2000); Shinohara (2004). Questions remain, however: for example, high-ranking
markedness constraints account for why the structures that are absent from L b are also those that
are repaired in loanword adaptation, but they do not necessarily predict which of the many possible
adaptation strategies are applied.
      Constraint-based models also provide new approaches to modeling lexical strata created by
borrowing, including constraint rankings that vary by stratum (J. Ito & Mester 1995; Inkelas & Zoll
2007) and constraints that are indexed to specific strata (Fukazawa et al. 1998; J. Ito & Mester
1999).


                                                   6
      The heightened interest in loanword phonology sparked by the development of constraint-
based phonological frameworks produced several books and special issues of journals (Kenstowicz
& Uffmann 2006; Calabrese & Wetzels 2009; Kenstowicz & Cabré 2012), as well as review articles
(Kang 2011; Paradis & LaCharité 2011), within roughly the first decade of the 21st century. Kang
(2011) is a particularly useful overview addressing the new insights that come from viewing
questions of loanword phonology, especially loanword adaptation, from a constraint-based
perspective. Kang discusses the role of loanword phonology as external evidence and summarizes
key debates over factors involved in loanword adaptation, including the phonology/phonetics
debate (see section 3.1) and the extent to which universal factors explain languages’ choice of
loanword repair. Paradis & LaCharité (2011) focus on arguments in favor of phonological factors in
loanword adaptation and make methodological recommendations for research in loanword
phonology, such as using large corpora, considering only cases where a form from Ls is borrowed
directly into Lb without intermediate borrowings in other languages, and controlling for the effects
of non-phonological factors (see section 3).

3. Non-phonological factors
Loanwords have long been regarded as a source of external evidence for the phonological grammar
— a way to confirm the productivity of phonological processes, for example, or a way to test claims
about representations or constraints (section 2). From the earliest studies, however, it has been
clear that loanword sound shapes can also be affected by factors beyond the phonological grammar,
especially phonetics and perception, orthography, and social context. A full understanding of
loanword phonology and its implications for phonological theory therefore requires an
understanding of how and under what circumstances such non-phonological factors contribute to
loanword adaptation or phonological generalizations over loanwords.

3.1 Phonetics and perception
Phonetic factors, including phonetic similarity and perceptual illusions, are a major non-phonological
influence on the process of loanword adaptation. There is a body of literature debating whether
adaptation should be seen as “primarily” phonological or phonetic (see Kang 2011 and Paradis &
LaCharité 2011 for discussion), but Kang (2011) concludes that it is too simplistic to view this as an
either/or question. Recent studies showing combined effects of phonetic and phonological factors,
sometimes explicitly investigating the circumstances under which particular factors predominate,
include Daland et al. (2015); Durvasula & Kahng (2015); Louriz (2015); Al-Hashmi (2016); Guba


                                                  7
(2016); Kang et al. (2016); Jian (2017); Durvasula et al. (2018); Huang & Lin (2019); Yun (2019);
Phetkla (2020); Glewwe (2021); Kang & Schertz (2021); Kim (2021); He & He (2022); Chen & Lu
(2022); Alenazi (2023); and Laidler (2023).

3.1.1 Phonetic similarity
To the extent that Lb speakers intend (consciously or not) to produce a loanword in a way that
sounds as similar as possible to its Ls form, then modifications to the Ls form made during loanword
adaptation are likely to be influenced by phonetic similarity (Silverman 1992; Kang 2003). Recent
evidence for such phonetic influence is provided by Ryu et al. (2020), who find a strong effect of Ls
phonetic duration on whether a diphthong in a loanword from Mandarin into a Chinese variety of
Korean is realized as a diphthong or adapted as a monophthong. Other examples include C. Ito &
Kenstowicz (2015), who show that changes over time in the phonetic correlates of laryngeal
contrasts in Ls Japanese and Lb Korean have changed loanword adaptation patterns, and Peperkamp
(2015), who finds an effect of coarticulation from the surrounding consonant context — a phonetic
rather than phonological factor — on participants' judgments when adapting English vowels into
French.
      At the same time, studies such as Batais (2013), Stoltzfus (2014), Natvig (2017), Kennard &
Lahiri (2020), and Yeung (2020) continue to support a role for phonological factors, including
prosodic-structure requirements and formal properties of feature systems, in loanword adaptation.

3.1.2 Perceptual illusions
The way an acoustic signal is initially perceived by a listener and assigned a phonological structure
can be influenced by the listener’s phonological system (Massaro & Cohen 1983). Consequently,
some differences between an Lb loanword and its Ls source form might not be the output of the
phonological production grammar at all — that is, might not be phonological processes applied to an
Ls form that an Lb speaker judges to be illicit — but instead might simply reflect how the Lb speaker
(inaccurately) perceives the Ls form.
      Dupoux et al. (1999) provide evidence for just this type of perceptual illusion, concerning
epenthesis. Japanese loanwords typically repair any illicit codas or consonant clusters from Ls
source forms with the insertion of [ɯ] (Lovins 1973). Dupoux et al. find that Japanese-speaking
listeners are much more likely than French-speaking listeners to perceive a medial [ɯ] between
consonants in a (non-word) stimulus such as abge, which is phonotactically illegal in Japanese. In
addition, Japanese listeners are significantly less likely than French listeners to distinguish between


                                                   8
stimuli such as abge and ab[ɯ]ge. These results indicate that Japanese listeners experience a
perceptual illusion when they hear stimuli such as abge, perceiving ab[ɯ]ge instead.
      Peperkamp & Dupoux (2003) propose that all loanword adaptation (that is not orthographic)
is a result of perceptual illusions of this kind (see also Boersma & Hamann 2009). This proposal has
a significant consequence: There can be no role for the Lb production grammar to modify illegal
structures in the Ls source form if the Lb listener never perceives such Lb-illicit structures in the first
place. On this view, it is not just that perceptual similarity plays a role in loanword adaptation;
instead, loanword adaptation would not be a matter for the phonological production grammar at all.
Arguments in favor of perceptual illusions as a key factor in loanword adaptation are also made by
Jacobs (2014) and Blevins (2017). Guevara-Rukoz et al. (2017), Guevara-Rukoz et al. (2021), and
Song (2022) explore the extent to which perceptual illusion effects can even predict the quality of
epenthetic vowels that appear when loanwords are adapted.
      On the other hand, evidence has been accumulating against the strong view that loanword
adaptation is always the result of perceptual illusions (Smith 2006; Uffmann 2006; Kabak & Idsardi
2007). Evidence that Lb speakers can sometimes perceive Ls contrasts is provided by Radomski
(2019) and Zuraw et al. (2019); another example would be the “Oprah effect” (Jurgec 2014), in
which Ls structures are adapted when loanwords undergo morphological derivation, but are
faithfully imported in morphologically simple loanwords. Other studies arguing that adaptation by
perception cannot be the whole story — often because the results of perception experiments differ
from loanword adaptation patterns — include De Jong & Cho (2012); Dong (2012); Mattingley et al.
(2015); Huang & Lin (2016); Szpyra-Kozłowska (2016); and Daland et al. (2019).

3.2 Orthography
Loanwords borrowed from written sources may show different phonological patterns or L s/Lb
structural correspondences from those borrowed orally, a fact that has been noted for some time
(Bloomfield 1933; Haugen 1950; Lovins 1973). Orthographic effects have also entered the
perception/phonology debate (section 3.1), with proponents of each side sometimes relegating
examples that seem to support the other position to “mere” orthographic effects. As with phonetic
and perceptual factors, however, it is important to investigate the influence of orthography on
loanword phonology systematically in order to understand how orthography interacts with
phonology (and phonetics).




                                                     9
3.2.1 Evidence from descriptions of established loanwords
Relatively strong evidence for orthographic influence on loanwords comes from Lb forms that
encode information represented in Ls only in writing and not in speech. Segments in the surface
form of a loanword in Lb that correspond to "silent" units in the Ls orthographic representation, with
no reflex in the Ls surface form, are reported by Duběda (2014) in loanwords from French into
Czech, by Cohen (2019) in loanwords from English into Hebrew, and by Yun (2019) in loanwords
from English into Telugu. Similarly, Cohen (2019) and Beckham (2019) discuss Lb forms that reflect
distinctions made in the Ls orthography but not in the spoken language.
      Sometimes, the Lb form of a loanword is unexpected from a phonetic or phonological
perspective, but plausible as the result of influence from Ls orthography. Szpyra-Kozłowska (2016)
discusses the outcomes of Ls English /ɪ/ in a corpus of established loanwords in Polish, where the
most phonetically similar Lb category should be /ɨ/. She presents examples that appear to be
conditioned by a Lb-influenced interpretation of the Ls vowel spelling: Ls /ɪ/ corresponding to Lb /i/
when spelled <i> in Ls, to Lb /ɨ/ when spelled <y>, to Lb /ɛ/ when spelled <e>, and to Lb /ɛj/ when
spelled <ey> or <ay>. Approximately 84.5% of the 700 English loans with /ɪ/ in Szpyra-Kozłowska’s
corpus are consistent with these orthographic generalizations, although phonological factors also
predict some of the same patterns. A similar effect is reported by Laidler (2023), who examines
loanwords into Russian whose source forms contain (British) English /ɜ:/. Shafi (2017) elicits
productions of established loanwords into Mirpur Pahari from English, and attributes to
orthographic effects both the avoidance of consonant deletion and also certain patterns of stress
variation in the Lb forms of loanwords.
      Damulakis & Nevins (2022) discuss an interesting pattern in Brazilian Portuguese involving an
orthographic version of the “Oprah effect” (Jurgec 2014), that is, a pattern in which an imported
(non-Lb) phoneme is maintained when a loan is morphologically underived in Lb but undergoes
adaptation in morphologically complex forms. In this case, involving loans from English, French, and
German, once the morphological context requires the imported phoneme to become adapted, the
outcome of adaptation is not a phonetically similar Lb vowel, but instead is determined by an Lb
grapheme-to-phoneme interpretation of the (Ls) orthographic form. For example, the English noun
bug [bʌg] is borrowed with an imported vowel /ɐ/ (marginal in Lb non-loans) as b[ɐ]g, but in the
derived verb b[u]gar ‘to bug out’, the vowel is adapted not to the phonetically similar [a], but to the
orthographically signaled [u].



                                                   10
      As seen in the cases discussed so far, orthographic influence on loanwords is typically caused
by the Ls form. A different kind of effect, based in properties of the Lb orthographic system, is found
in Chinese languages, in the class of loanwords known in Chinese linguistics as transliterations (Cook
2018). This type of loanword is written with hanzi characters — which typically represent a specific
morpheme, that is, a particular meaning as well as a sound shape — but in the loanword are used for
their sound value alone. A transliteration, therefore, is an adaptation of the sound shape of the L s
form in terms of orthographically permissible syllables in Lb. Cook (2018: 12) provides the example
of Mandarin 伊妹儿 [i55-meɪ51-ɑɻ35], where the hanzi graphemes, if representing morphemes, would
translate (meaninglessly) as 'he/she-little.sister-son', but are used in this word to represent a
transliteration loan from the English Ls form email.
      In a situation like that of the Chinese transliteration loans, if the orthographically permissible
syllables are a subset of the phonologically permissible syllables, then the Lb forms of loanwords
may include mismatches with the Ls source words that are driven not by the phonology of either
language, or even by Lb perception, but purely by Lb orthographic considerations. Lb speakers could,
of course, maintain Ls-based spoken distinctions in loanwords even when these distinctions are not
represented in the Lb orthography, but if the Lb spoken forms are consistent with their Lb
orthographic representations, this constitutes Lb-driven orthographic interference in loanword
phonology. To see the effects of this kind of Lb orthographic filter, it is useful to contrast
transliteration loans in Mandarin with what Cook (2018) calls wholesale loans, in which the Ls (often
English) orthography is borrowed along with the semantics and (an adaptation of) the phonological
shape. One example is Mandarin OK (from English OK), which includes the syllable [kheɪ], a C+V
combination that corresponds to no hanzi character and thus could not be represented in a
transliteration loanword (Cook 2018: 19). Other cases of possible Lb orthographic effects on the
sound shape of loanwords in Mandarin are discussed by Hsieh et al. (2009: 240, note 7) and Chang
(2020).

3.2.2 Experimental evidence
Orthographic effects are most clearly visible when they lead to Lb outcomes that are distinct from
phonological and perceptual factors. However, orthography might influence loanword phonology
even in cases where it is indistinguishable from the influence of phonological or perceptual factors
(Vendelin & Peperkamp 2006; Crawford 2009; Daland et al. 2015). Consequently, a deeper




                                                    11
understanding of the role of orthography requires experiments or analyses that explicitly control for
non-orthographic factors.
      In one of the first such studies, Vendelin & Peperkamp (2006) present French bilingual
speakers with English-like nonce words to be adapted into French under two conditions: one with
only auditory presentation of the stimuli, and one with both auditory and orthographic presentation.
They find that for some vowel categories, there is a difference in the most frequently chosen French
vowel between the two conditions — demonstrating that orthography can indeed influence
adaptation. This initial study has inspired similar experiments for other language contexts,
including Al-Hashmi (2016), as well as Daland et al. (2015), whose Perceptual Uncertainty
Hypothesis proposes that orthography plays a greater role in loanword adaptation when perceptual
information underdetermines the Lb phonological parse.

3.2.3 Phonological models incorporating orthographic influence
If information coming from an orthographic representation can have an effect on phonological
behavior, then the phonological grammar must have access to orthographic information. One way of
modeling this is to propose that speakers’ phonological representations of Ls forms can include
information acquired from multiple sources. For example, Smith (2009) models loanword
adaptation with a posited Ls representation, a repository for all the information the Lb speaker has
about the Ls source form, along with an associated correspondence relation (McCarthy & Prince
1999) that allows for faithfulness to this representation. Crucially, the posited Ls representation may
include information received from multiple sources, including perception, orthography, and
knowledge of Lb phonology — whether that information is accurate, or distorted from the L s form by
Lb perceptual filtering or orthographic misparsing. Mathieu (2012) proposes a single input
representation that includes perceptual and orthographic information simultaneously, along with
faithfulness constraints specific to orthographic and to phonological material respectively.
      Along similar lines, but implemented as an extension of the Bidirectional Phonetics and
Phonology framework (Boersma 2011), is the model developed by Hamann & Colombo (2017). In
this model, the phonological surface form (which itself corresponds to a lexical underlying form at a
higher level of representation) stands in correspondence with two distinct representations: the
auditory form, as in Boersma (2011), and here also the orthographic form. Distinct sets of
correspondence constraints link the surface form to the auditory form and the orthographic form —
CUE constraints and ORTH(ographic) constraints respectively — and these can be ranked with respect




                                                  12
to each other and with respect to the structural (markedness) constraints that hold of the surface
form. Hamann & Colombo present this model as a general model of reading and writing that can
also account for orthographic effects in loanword adaptation, including cases where orthographic
effects occur along with auditory effects.
      Hamann & Colombo's (2017) analysis of loanwords from English into Italian applies the Lb-
internal ORTH constraints directly to loans from Ls (with their Ls orthography). As Hamann &
Colombo note, this strategy is only available if Ls and Lb share an alphabet (or other system of
glyphs). Vendelin & Peperkamp (2006), in their discussion of orthographic effects on loanwords
from English into French (section 3.2.2), raise the possibility that French speakers have learned a set
of grapheme(Ls)-to-phoneme(Lb) mappings, which are potentially distinct from orthographic
mappings within Lb; in cases like this, Hamann & Colombo's approach would need to be augmented
with additional ORTH constraints relating Ls orthography directly to Lb forms. Overall, however, the
general insight behind their proposal seems appealing, especially the ability for orthographic
constraints to be in the same grammatical system as, and ranked with respect to, phonological
constraints, while representations for orthographic and acoustic information remain distinct.
Damulakis & Nevins (2022), in their analysis of the orthographic "Oprah effect" (section 3.2.1),
formalize their account in terms of Hamann & Colombo’s model.
      Important questions nevertheless remain with respect to the formal modeling of orthographic
effects on loanword phonology. Hamann & Colombo’s model would seem to allow any possible
combination of auditory and orthographic properties to determine the shape of loanwords in L b, but
if Daland et al. (2015) are right that orthographic effects matter more when perceptual effects are
less available, is this something that the model should encode? Are there properties that are cross-
linguistically more likely to be influenced by orthography or by perception, and if so, why?

3.2.4 Summary
As evidence accumulates concerning orthographic influence on the Lb forms of loanwords,
experiments uncover more details about the context and degree of such influence, and formal
models that include orthographic effects on loanwords are developed and tested, our understanding
moves beyond the traditional view that orthographic influence is nothing but a source of error in
loanword phonology. Making the contribution of orthographic influence explicit can help clarify the
role of factors like perception and the Lb grammar in loanword phonology. Including orthographic




                                                  13
influence in formal phonological models can potentially shed light on the question of how the
phonological grammar itself interacts with written language in the context of a literate society.

3.3 Social context
Given that the act of borrowing a word into a language is a type of language contact, it is
unsurprising that social factors can influence how loanwords are adapted and become established in
a community. There are many options for integrating an Ls form into Lb: Do non-Lb phonological
structures tend to be imported, or adapted? Are adaptation strategies generally based on the L b or
Ls phonological grammar, or speech perception (section 3.1), or orthographic factors (section 3.2),
or some combination? Have adaptation strategies become conventionalized, so that even speakers
who are highly proficient in Ls systematically adapt loanwords to “fit” Lb? The answers to questions
like these for any individual borrowing situation are potentially influenced by the social context.
Consequently, it is important to determine how social factors interact with the phonology of
loanwords, so that such factors can be controlled for in considering the implications of loanwords
for phonological theory.
      This section discusses proficiency in Ls, identity construction and attitude toward Ls, and
community-based conventionalization of loanword adaptation strategies. For more about
borrowing in the broader context of language contact, see Thomason & Kaufman (1988), Van
Coetsem (1988, 2000), Simonović (2015), and Poplack (2018). For a general discussion of
methodologies for studying language contact and language variation in multilingual communities,
see Ravindranath (2015).

3.3.1 Proficiency in Ls
As Haugen (1950) hypothesized, Lb speakers' familiarity with or proficiency in Ls can influence the
relative rate of importing non-Lb phonological structures in loanwords. For example, Kadenge &
Mudzingwa (2012) find that monolingual chiShona speakers consistently nativize non-Lb segments
and syllable structures in loanwords from English, while bilingual speakers import /l/, post-nasal
voiceless obstruents, and onset clusters. In Sa’aida’s (2015) study of English loanwords in Jordanian
Urban Arabic among female students at the University of Jordan, participants specializing in English
and with a history of English as the medium of instruction both use more English loanwords in
general, and import more Ls segment categories and final consonant clusters, than participants
studying other subjects and with a history of Arabic-medium instruction.



                                                  14
      Not only the speaker's Ls proficiency, but even the speaker's perception of the interlocutors' L s
proficiency, can be a factor in determining whether loanwords are nativized. Lev‐Ari et al. (2014)
perform a statistical analysis of Spanish loanwords in Mexicano, including both established loans
and spontaneous borrowings, elicited in a conversation task. They find no effect of the speaker's
own degree of bilingualism on the choice between retaining or nativizing non-L b segments and
consonant clusters in the loanwords. However, they do find an effect of the factor they call
“interlocutors’ bilingualism,” coded as ‘high’ if at least 75% of the participants in the conversation
where the loanword was produced were considered by a research consultant from the community to
both speak and understand Spanish, and as ‘low’ otherwise.
      Not only the choice between importation and adaptation of Ls structures, but also the types of
adaptation, can differ based on Lb speakers' proficiency in Ls. A number of studies assessing the
interaction of Ls proficiency and perceptual factors in loanword or nonce-loan adaptation find that
lower levels of proficiency in Ls correlate with stronger effects of phonetic and perceptual factors
(section 3.1) on adaptation patterns. Nomura and Ishikawa (2018) compare the perception of
English words by Japanese speakers classified as either introductory or intermediate English-
language learners, finding that the intermediate learners have a slightly lower rate of perceptual
epenthesis. Stronger perceptual similarity effects for Lb speakers with lower Ls proficiency are
reported by Huang & Lin (2016), Kwon (2017), and Wang (2023).
      Bilingual speakers are not necessarily immune to the influence of perceptual similarity,
however. Aktü rk-Drake (2014) looks at the adaptation of Swedish loanwords into Turkish by
speakers of Turkish who are bilingual in Swedish, and finds that phonetically long (but
phonologically short) Swedish vowels are adapted as long vowels in Turkish, while phonologically
long (but phonetically not very long) Swedish consonants are adapted as short consonants — the
surface, phonetic length determines the adaptation even though the speakers are bilingual.

3.3.2 Attitudes and identity
Beyond the effects of Ls proficiency in loanword adaptation and loanword phonology, other social
factors can influence how loanwords are adapted or produced by Lb speakers. In particular, when
there is variation in the pronunciation of loanwords, a number of social or identity-related factors
have been shown to play a role.
      One such factor is the social attitude of Lb speakers toward Ls language and culture (Weinreich
1968). Paradis & LaCharité (2012) propose that the degree to which Ls is considered prestigious by



                                                   15
Lb speakers can influence the choice of strategy for adapting Ls phonemes. When Ls is held in high
prestige, they argue, Lb speakers may opt for a "flawed production-based attempt" to import an Ls
phoneme, resulting in an adaptation that is more perceptually similar to the L s source phoneme than
would otherwise be predicted. Jaggers (2018) finds that the attitudes of American English speakers
toward the source of a loanword contribute to the likelihood for a given speaker to use a more Ls-like
or a more Lb-adapted pronunciation of a loanword, such as a foreign place name.
      At a more fine-grained situational level, Lev-Ari & Peperkamp (2014) and Lev‐Ari et al. (2014)
find, for Hebrew and Mexicano respectively, that the degree of adaptation of L s sounds in loanwords
can be influenced by the prestige of the donor language within the semantic domain of the
loanword. Similarly, Hashimoto (2019a, b) reports that the choice of a more or less Ls-like
pronunciation of loanwords from Mā ori into New Zealand English is influenced by situational factors
such as the topic of discussion as well as by a given speaker’s attitude toward Ls.
      Also relevant are attitudes, not just toward the language or culture that is the source of a
particular loanword, but toward language or cultural contact more generally. Jaggers (2018) looks
at loanwords in American English that show variation between more and less L s-like pronunciations,
analyzing the effect of various social predictors. He finds some effect of political identity, and (as
noted above) of attitude toward Ls specifically, but the strongest social predictor of more Ls-like
pronunciations is the speaker's degree of alignment with a globalist, rather than a nationalist,
ideology. A general effect of openness to contact is also found by Jaggers & Baese-Berk (2020) in an
experiment on listeners' representation of ambiguous acoustic cues. American English speakers
heard C(ǝ)CVC nonce loanwords, where (ǝ) varied along a duration and intensity continuum from
nothing ([CCVC]) to a full schwa ([CǝCVC]); the onset clusters in the CCVC interpretations were legal
in English, so this was not a potential case of perceptual illusion (section 3.1.2). The more highly
speakers rate themselves as open to traveling, learning foreign languages, and pronouncing foreign
names close to their original pronunciations, the more likely they are to represent an ambiguous
acoustic cue (from the non-endpoints of the continuum) as a full /ǝ/ for a word that was presented
as a loanword.
      As with other sociolinguistic, especially sociophonetic, variables (Eckert 2019), the
importation versus adaptation of Ls phonological characteristics can be used by speakers to express
aspects of their identity. For example, the political identity of the speaker is one factor that predicts
more versus less Ls-like productions of loanwords in the study by Jaggers (2018) (see above). Babel
(2016) describes the conditions under which speakers of a variety of Bolivian Spanish maintain L s-


                                                   16
faithful laryngealized (aspirated and ejective) consonants in loanwords from Quechua. Notably,
conversations concerning topics for which loanwords are generally most likely to appear, including
agriculture, the local landscape, and insults or threats, are also the contexts in which laryngealized
consonants are most likely to be realized. While most uses of laryngealized consonants occur within
Quechua loanwords, Babel even documents cases where heavy aspiration is realized in Spanish
words for expressive or sound-symbolic purposes.
      Aziz et al. (2023) elicit productions of established loanwords from Indonesian into Acehnese
from bilingual speakers highly proficient in Ls. They find a tendency for a variety of Lb-compatible Ls
vowels, especially /i/, /ǝ/, and /a/, to be adapted as the high back unrounded vowel /ɯ/, which
does not occur in Ls and is a salient characteristic of Lb. Aziz et al. propose that this adaptation
pattern is used to express Acehnese identity by making the loanwords sound more like Lb words.
This phenomenon, involving changes to an Ls structure that would already have been legal in L b, can
be called overadaptation.
      In general, since overadaptation involves changes to Lb-compatible structures, it is not likely to
be caused either by Lb speakers' perception of Ls forms, or by the Lb non-loan phonological grammar.
We might therefore expect cases of overadaptation to be related to social factors — such as the
expression of Lb speakers' identity, as argued by Aziz et al. (2023) for Acehnese, or community-wide
social conventions for loanword phonology, which are addressed in the following section.

3.3.3 Social conventions for loanword phonology
Once a community has adapted a number of loanwords, the possibility emerges for the development
of a set of conventions for how loanwords, perhaps from a specific source language, are to be
adapted.
      Shinohara et al. (2011) compare the results of perception experiments with patterns of
loanword adaptation in Korean from the source languages Japanese, English, and French. They find
a number of cases where the loanword adaptation patterns are systematic, but nevertheless diverge
from the actual perception results, and argue that the loanword patterns show effects of social
conventions, including official prescriptive standards, for loanwords; a similar argument is made by
De Jong & Cho (2012), who compare the results of an experiment on the perception of English
stimuli by Korean listeners with a corpus of established loanwords from English into Korean, and
conclude that some of the differences are explained by an “explicit sociocultural standard.” Duběda
(2014) argues that consonants, and to some extent vowels, in Czech loanwords from French are



                                                   17
mapped to Czech phonological categories in a “mechanical,” conventionalized way, referring to this
system as a “shadow phonology” of French represented by speakers of Czech. Chang (2020)
identifies effects of prescriptive considerations in lexical tone assignment for loanwords from
English into Mandarin. General models of loanword adaptation by speech communities rather than
by individual speakers, which explicitly account for effects of conventionalization, are proposed by
Crawford (2009) and Uffmann (2013). See also Poplack (2018: chapter 10) on social factors in
aspects of borrowing behavior beyond phonology.

3.3.4 Summary: Effects of social factors and social context on loanword phonology
On the one hand, lower Ls proficiency on the part of Lb speakers often correlates with a greater
reliance on perception-based patterns in loanword adaptation. This is intuitively plausible:
speakers who know little of Ls might be expected to rely more on what they can hear, rather than on
abstract categories that are meaningful in the context of the Ls grammar.
      Other social factors discussed here, including attitudes toward L s or toward linguistic and
cultural contact in general, as well as the indexation of identity, appear mainly to be predictors of the
degree to which loanwords undergo adaptation (nativization) versus importation (preservation of
Ls-like structures). That said, Jaggers & Baese-Berk (2020) find that attitudes toward linguistic
contact can also influence the interpretation of acoustic cues in loanword adaptation. It will be
interesting to see whether future studies uncover further examples in which speaker attitudes
influence adaptation strategies beyond the question of adaptation versus importation.

4. Implications of loanwords for phonological theory
As we have seen, factors beyond phonology, especially phonetic, orthographic, and social factors,
also influence the phonological shape of loanwords (section 3). Thus, loanword patterns are not
necessarily a direct window into the Lb phonological grammar (see also de Lacy 2009). Much recent
and current work in loanword phonology seeks to disentangle the effects of these various influences,
both to understand each better in its own right, but also to clarify how and when evidence from
loanwords can legitimately be invoked in phonological argumentation. Loanword data still has the
potential to serve as external evidence for claims about the Lb phonological grammar specifically,
and about the nature of the phonological component of human language more generally.




                                                   18
4.1. Methodologies
Current work on the phonology of loanwords and its implications often involves experimental,
corpus, and/or quantitative methods, in addition to formal phonological analysis.
        Nonce-loanword nativization experiments, in which participants “borrow” Ls-like nonwords,
remove the potential confound of Lb speakers’ knowledge of established loans and directly examine
how they adapt loans that they have never encountered before. This methodology has the advantage
of showing what nativization patterns are productive for, or preferred by, Lb speakers. Unless the
stimuli are explicitly designed to do so, however, these experiments may not distinguish among the
effects of the many phonological and non-phonological factors that can influence loanword
adaptation.
        Perception experiments can be used to compare Lb speakers’ perception of Ls stimuli with
patterns observed in loanword adaptation or established loanwords. This methodology does not
ask Lb speakers to nativize an Ls form, but rather probes what they hear when they encounter
structures from Ls. This approach can be used to identify patterns in loanword phonology that do,
or do not, conform to perceptual illusion effects for the same language (section 3.1.2).
        In a sense, almost all research on established loanwords is a type of corpus study; there is a
long tradition of drawing generalizations from lists of loanwords, whether collected from
dictionaries, elicited from Lb speakers, or observed naturalistically. Recent years have seen an
increase in studies using larger-scale corpora, more sophisticated statistical analysis methods, or a
combination of the two. The goals of such studies often include the documentation of trends or
patterns that may previously have been described only impressionistically or anecdotally, as well as
the identification of new generalizations about loanwords or adaptation processes — including
gradient trends or tendencies that were not examined, or perhaps not even observed, in earlier
work.
        It is important to keep in mind that different experiment methodologies have been shown to
amplify different factors, such as phonetic factors versus phonological representations, or gradient
versus categorical judgments (Paradis & LaCharité 2011; Kawahara 2013).

4.2 External evidence for aspects of the Lb phonological grammar
Recent research continuing to apply loanword data as evidence for phonological productivity
includes Sano (2012), who computes statistics over a corpus of Japanese spontaneous speech to
examine the production of (imported) geminate voiced obstruents in loanwords, arguing that


                                                    19
certain Lb restrictions on these geminates are productive enough to be gradiently active even in
loanwords. Similarly, Kawahara (2012), using data from loanword and nonce-word judgment tasks,
finds gradient effects in loanwords of a phonological restriction that holds categorically only in non-
loans in Japanese: Lyman's Law, a prohibition on multiple voiced obstruents in the same morpheme.
Traoré & Féry (2019) use adaptation patterns from loanwords in the Frò ʔò dialect of Tagbana to
demonstrate the productivity of a set of morphophonological processes affecting syllable structure,
which provides support for claims they make about the set of possible shapes for underlying
representations of non-loan morphemes in the language. Other examples include AlShammari &
AlShammari (2020), on Arabic loanwords in Turkish, and Abdallah (2021), on English, Hausa, and
Arabic loanwords in Dagbani.
      Emergence-of-the-unmarked effects (McCarthy & Prince 1994) are found in loanwords (Paradis
1995) when patterns or defaults that are not observed in the non-loan grammar become evident in
adaptation patterns or loanword-specific generalizations. Adell (2013) describes a process of
gradient vowel devoicing that occurs in Kaqchikel only in Spanish loanwords, but conforms to
typological generalizations about vowel devoicing despite its limited domain of application. Cohen
(2013) finds evidence for emergent effects of vowel harmony in loanwords in Modern Hebrew —
and further predicts, given the OT postulate of universal constraints, that such emergent vowel
harmony should be a cross-linguistic effect. Other examples include Guba (2016, 2021), who
identifies emergent effects in segmental and prosodic properties of English loanwords in Ammani
Arabic, and Radomski (2019), who argues that the preservation of contrasts between words with the
Polish voiceless affricates [tʂ] (postalveolar) and [tɕ] (prepalatal) in English is an emergent effect of
the faithfulness constraint IDENT-IO[±distributed].
      In many cases, claims about the Lb phonological grammar that are based on facts from
loanword adaptation depend on the adaptation patterns being phonological operations, rather than
misperceptions or perceptual illusions (section 3.1). An interesting exception is Song (2022), who
applies data from perceptual illusion effects in loanword adaptation in North Kyungsang Korean to
argue that the identity of the vowel involved in perceptual epenthesis depends on the phonological
vowel inventory of the language.

4.3 External evidence for approaches to phonological analysis
Loanwords continue to be used as evidence for particular theoretical approaches to phonological
analysis. For example, Oh (2012) argues that morphologically complex loanwords from English in
Korean provide support for a Lexical Conservatism effect in morphological alternations (Steriade

                                                   20
2000). Davis & Rahgeb (2014) use evidence from final-stress words borrowed from English and
French into Cairene Arabic as part of a more general argument concerning the phonology of
geminates, supporting a moraic representation (Hayes 1989) over a skeletal-slot representation
(Leben 1980). Becker & Jurgec (2017) argue that the same markedness constraint against high tone
on lax mid vowels that drives a tone alternation in the non-loan phonology of Slovenian also drives a
vowel quality alternation in loanwords, noting that loanword evidence for this proposed tone/vowel
co-occurrence constraint is valuable support because phonological interactions between tone and
vowel quality are typologically uncommon. Alhoody (2019) uses evidence from the adaptation of
English loanwords into Qassimi Arabic to support a particular analysis of contrastive versus
redundant features in Lb, implementing Contrastive Hierarchy Theory (Dresher 2009).

4.4 Lexical strata and their theoretical implications
To the extent that lexical strata are synchronically productive for Lb speakers, the phonological
grammar of Lb has to be able to specify different phonologies for different strata (sections 2.2, 2.3).
Complicating matters further, lexical strata often reflect a “hierarchy of foreignness” (Kiparsky 1968;
see also Holden 1976; J. Ito & Mester 1995, 1999), in which certain Ls structures are more frequently
nativized than others. J. Ito & Mester (1999) enforce such nativization hierarchies in their OT
indexed-faithfulness model with a metaconstraint that specifies a consistent faithfulness ranking
across strata. Recent work in Harmonic Grammar (HG; Legendre et al. 1990), where constraints are
weighted rather than ranked, has aimed to derive nativization hierarchies from basic principles of
the model: Hsu & Jesney (2017, 2018) develop an HG version of stratum-specific rankings with
scalar weights that represent the degree of “foreignness” for each lexeme and algorithmically adjust
constraint domination relations accordingly. Smith (2018) makes use of HG’s cumulative constraint
interaction, allow general and stratum-specific constraints to generate a consistent faithfulness
ranking across strata by default.
      An alternative approach to grammars with phonologically distinct lexical subsets has been
developed by Becker & Gouskova (2016). In their model, forms are assigned to distinct lexical
subclasses by gatekeeper grammars before their outputs are determined by a (possibly subclass-
specific) grammar proper.
      The synchronic productivity of lexical strata is itself an empirical question (Rice 2006), which
has been tested experimentally by Pinta (2013) for Guarani, by Smith & Tashiro (2019) for Japanese,
and by Pons-Moll & Torres-Tamarit (2021) for Catalan. These studies demonstrate that at least some



                                                   21
stratum-specific patterns and nativization hierarchies are productive, although the results are
complex. Meanwhile, the formal learnability of lexical strata has been computationally confirmed by
Morita & O’Donnell (2022) for Japanese. Further data on productivity and formal learnability for
lexical strata in additional languages would be welcome.

5. Conclusions
In addition to the phonological grammar of Lb, the phonological shape of loanwords can be affected
by a number of factors, including phonetic similarity, perceptual illusions, orthography, and the
social characteristics and attitudes of Lb speakers. Nevertheless, when the influence of these factors
is controlled for, patterns in loanword phonology can serve as external evidence for the L b grammar
or for phonological models more generally. Moreover, precisely because there are so many different
factors at play, loanwords can be a fruitful testing ground for models of phonological interfaces.
      Recent years have seen an increase in experimental, computational, and statistical approaches
to loanword phonology. Loanword data from additional languages, and studies investigating new
and familiar data with more sophisticated methodologies, continue to refine our understanding of
possible patterns in loanword phonology and their implications for phonological theory.

References
Abdallah, Iddrisu (2021). Segmental processes in loanword adaptation in Dagbani. Journal of West
      African Languages 48(2). 42–58.
      [https://journalofwestafricanlanguages.org/index.php/downloads/summary/141-volume-
      48-2/767-segmental-processes-in-loanword-adaptation-in-dagbani]
Adell, Eric (2013). Descriptive account of Spanish loanword phonology in Kaqchikel. Kansas Working
      Papers in Linguistics 34. 43–59. [https://doi.org/10.17161/KWPL.1808.12862]
Aktü rk-Drake, Memet (2015). Phonological adoption through bilingual borrowing: Comparing elite
      bilinguals and heritage bilinguals. PhD dissertation, Stockholm University.
Al-Hashmi, Shadiya (2016). The phonetics and phonology of Arabic loanwords in Turkish: Residual
      effects of gutturals. PhD dissertation, University of York.
Alenazi, Areej (2023). Variation in loanword phonology: The case of /v/ and /tʃ/ in English loanwords
      into Saudi Arabic. PhD dissertation, University of York.
Alhoody, Metab Mohammad A. (2019). Phonological adaptation of English loanwords into Qassimi
      Arabic: An optimality–theoretic account. PhD dissertation, Newcastle University.



                                                   22
AlShammari, Wafi Fhaid & Ahmad Radi AlShammari (2020). Adaptation of Turkish loanwords
      originating from Arabic. International Journal of English Linguistics 10(5). 388–398.
      [https://doi.org/10.5539/ijel.v10n5p388]
Aziz, Zulfadli A., Rob Amery & Faisal Mustafa (2023). Vowel adaptations of Indonesian loanwords
      into dialects of Acehnese: Reinforcing Acehnese identity. Studies in English Language and
      Education 10(1). 447–469. [https://jurnal.usk.ac.id/SiELE/article/view/25488]
Babel, Anna M. (2016). Affective motivations for borrowing: Performing local identity through loan
      phonology. Language & Communication 49. 70–83.
      [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langcom.2016.06.002]
Batais, Saleh Saeed (2013). Consonantal and syllabic repairs of Arabic and Dutch loanwords in
      Indonesian: A phonological account. PhD dissertation, University of Florida.
Becker, Michael & Maria Gouskova (2016). Source-oriented generalizations as grammar inference in
      Russian vowel deletion. LI 47(3). 391–425. [https://doi-org/10.1162/LING_a_00217]
Becker, Michael & Peter Jurgec (2017). Interactions of tone and ATR in Slovenian. In Wolfgang
      Kehrein, Bjö rn Kö hnlein, Paul Boersma & Marc van Oostendorp (eds.) Segmental structure and
      tone. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. 11–25. [https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110341263]
Beckham, Sarah (2019). Loanword phonology in Marathi. PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin–
      Madison.
Blevins, Juliette (2017). Between natural and unnatural phonology: the case of cluster-splitting
      epenthesis. In Claire Bowern, Laurence Horn & Raffaella Zanuttini (eds.) On looking into words
      (and beyond): structures, relations, analyses. Berlin: Language Science Press. 3–15.
Bloomfield, Leonard (1933). Language. New York: Henry Holt & Co.
Boersma, Paul (2011). A programme for bidirectional phonology and phonetics and their acquisition
      and evolution. In Anton Benz & Jason Mattausch (eds.) Bidirectional optimality theory.
      Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 33–72.
Boersma, Paul & Silke Hamann (2009). Loanword adaptation as first-language phonological
      perception. In Andrea Calabrese & W. Leo Wetzels (eds.) Loan phonology. Amsterdam: John
      Benjamins. 11-58.
Botha, Rudolf (1973). The justification of linguistic hypotheses. The Hague: Mouton.
Broselow, Ellen (2000). Stress, epenthesis, and segment transformation in Selayarese loans. BLS 25.
      311–325.
Calabrese, Andrea & W. Leo Wetzels (eds.) (2009). Loan phonology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.


                                                  23
Chen, Yangyu & Yu-An Lu (2022). Variation in loanword adaptation: a case from Mandarin Chinese.
     Second Language Research 38(3). 423–447. [https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658320961444]
Chomsky, Noam & Morris Halle (1968). The sound pattern of English. New York: Harper & Row.
Churma, Donald G. (1979). Arguments from external evidence in phonology. PhD dissertation, The
     Ohio State University.
Clayton, Mary L. (1976). The redundance of underlying morpheme-structure conditions. Lg 52. 295–
     313. [https://doi.org/10.2307/412561]
Cohen, Evan-Gary (2013). The emergence of the unmarked: vowel harmony in Hebrew loanword
     adaptation. Lingua 131. 66–79. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2013.02.001]
Cohen, Evan-Gary (2019). Loanword phonology in Modern Hebrew. Brill’s Journal of Afroasiatic
     Languages and Linguistics 11(1). 182–200. [https://doi.org/10.1163/18776930-01101012]
Cook, Angela (2018). A typology of lexical borrowing in Modern Standard Chinese. Lingua Sinica
     4(1). 6:1–32. [https://doi.org/10.1186/s40655-018-0038-7]
Crawford, Clifford J. (2009). Adaptation and transmission in Japanese loanword phonology. PhD
     dissertation, Cornell University.
Daland, Robert, Mira Oh & Lisa Davidson (2019). On the relation between speech perception and
     loanword adaptation: cross-linguistic perception of Korean-illicit word-medial clusters. NLLT
     37. 825–868. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s11049-018-9423-2]
Daland, Robert, Mira Oh & Syejeong Kim (2015). When in doubt, read the instructions: orthographic
     effects in loanword adaptation. Lingua 159. 70–92.
     [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2015.03.002]
Damulakis, Gean & Andrew Nevins (2022). An orthographic twist to the Oprah Effect. Radical 3. 89–
     124. [https://radical.cnrs.fr/damulakis-nevins-an-orthographic-twist-to-the-oprah-effect/]
Davis, Stuart & Marwa Ragheb (2014). Geminate representation in Arabic. Perspectives on Arabic
     Linguistics 25. 3–19.
de Jong, Kenneth & Mi-Hui Cho (2012). Loanword phonology and perceptual mapping: comparing
     two corpora of Korean contact with English. Lg 88(2). 341–368.
     [https://www.jstor.org/stable/23251834]
de Lacy, Paul (2009). Phonological evidence. In Steve Parker (ed.) Phonological argumentation:
     essays on evidence and motivation. London: Equinox. 43–78.
Dong, Xiaoli (2012). What borrowing buys us: a study of Mandarin Chinese loanword phonology. PhD
     dissertation, Utrecht University.


                                                24
Dresher, B. Elan (2009). The contrastive hierarchy in phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
      Press.
Duběda, Tomá š (2014). When one phonology meets another: the case of Gallicisms in Czech.
      Proceedings of the Olomouc Linguistics Colloquium 2014. 701–713. [http://olinco.upol.cz/wp-
      content/uploads/2017/05/olinco-2014-proceedings.pdf]
Dupoux, Emmanuel, Kazuhiko Kakehi, Yuki Hirose, Christophe Pallier & Jacques Mehler (1999).
      Epenthetic vowels in Japanese: a perceptual illusion?. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
      Human Perception and Performance 25(6). 1568–1578. [https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-
      1523.25.6.1568]
Durvasula, Karthik, Ho-Hsin Huang, Sayako Uehara, Qian Luo & Yen-Hwei Lin (2018). Phonology
      modulates the illusory vowels in perceptual illusions: evidence from Mandarin and English.
      Laboratory Phonology 9(1). 7:1–27. [https://doi.org/10.5334/labphon.57]
Durvasula, Karthik & Jimin Kahng (2015). Illusory vowels in perceptual epenthesis: the role of
      phonological alternations. Phonology 32(3). 385–416.
      [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675715000263]
Eckert, Penelope (2019). The limits of meaning: social indexicality, variation, and the cline of
      interiority. Lg 95(4). 751–776. [https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.2019.0072]
Fukazawa, Haruka, Mafuyu Kitahara & Mitsuhiko Ota (1998). Lexical stratification and ranking
      invariance in constraint-based grammars. CLS 34:2. 47-62.
Glewwe, Eleanor (2021). The phonological determinants of tone in English loanwords in Mandarin.
      Phonology 38(2). 203–239. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675721000154]
Guba, Mohammed Nour Abu (2016). Phonological adaptation of English loanwords in Ammani Arabic.
      PhD dissertation, University of Salford.
Guba, Mohammed Nour Abu (2021). Gemination within English loanwords in Ammani Arabic: an
      optimality-theoretic analysis. JL 57(1). 3–40. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022226720000183]
Guevara-Rukoz, Adriana, Isabelle Lin, Masahiro Morii, Yasuyo Minagawa, Emmanuel Dupoux &
      Sharon Peperkamp (2017). Which epenthetic vowel? Phonetic categories versus acoustic
      detail in perceptual vowel epenthesis. JASA 142(2). EL211–EL217.
      [https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4998138]
Guevara-Rukoz, Adriana, Shi Yu & Sharon Peperkamp (2017). Speech perception and loanword
      adaptations: the case of copy-vowel epenthesis. Interspeech 2021. 4004–4008.
      [https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2021-1481]


                                                   25
Hamann, Silke & Ilaria E. Colombo (2017). A formal account of the interaction of orthography and
      perception: English intervocalic consonants borrowed into Italian. NLLT 35. 683–714.
      [https://doi.org/10.1007/s11049-017-9362-3]
Hashimoto, Daiki (2019a). Loanword phonology in New Zealand English: exemplar activation and
      message predictability. PhD dissertation, University of Canterbury.
Hashimoto, Daiki (2019b). Sociolinguistic effects on loanword phonology: topic in speech and
      cultural image. Laboratory Phonology 10(1). 11:1–34. [https://doi.org/10.5334/labphon.187]
Haugen, Einar (1950). The analysis of linguistic borrowing. Lg 26(2). 210–231.
      [https://doi.org/10.2307/410058]
Hayes, Bruce (1989). Compensatory lengthening in moraic phonology. LI 20(2). 253–306.
      [https://www.jstor.org/stable/4178626]
He, Mosi & Jianing He (2022). Integration of perceptual similarity with faithful mapping of
      phonological contrast in loanword adaptation: Mandarin Chinese adaptation of English stops.
      Journal of Language Teaching and Research 13(3). 541–549.
      [https://doi.org/10.17507/jltr.1303.10]
Holden, Kyril. 1976. Assimilation rates of borrowings and phonological productivity. Lg 52. 131–147.
      [https://doi.org/10.2307/413213]
Hsieh, Feng-fan, Michael Kenstowicz & Xiaomin Mou (2009). Mandarin adaptations of coda nasals in
      English loanwords. In Andrea Calabrese & W. Leo Wetzels (eds.) Loan phonology. Amsterdam:
      John Benjamins. 131–154.
Hsu, Brian & Karen Jesney (2017). Loanword adaptation in Québec French: evidence for weighted
      scalar constraints. WCCFL 34: 249–258. [http://lingref.com/cpp/wccfl/34/paper3318.pdf]
Hsu, Brian & Karen Jesney (2018). Weighted scalar constraints capture the typology of loanword
      adaptation. Proceedings of the Annual Meetings on Phonology 2017.
      [http://dx.doi.org/10.3765/amp.v5i0.4246].
Huang, Ho-Hsin & Yen-Hwei Lin (2016). To epenthesize or not? Adaptations of English coda [m] in
      Standard Mandarin loanwords. Proceedings of the Annual Meetings on Phonology 2015.
      [https://doi.org/10.3765/amp.v3i0.3686]
Huang, Ho-Hsin & Yen-Hwei Lin (2019). Vowel quality cues to variable nasal adaptation in Mandarin
      loanword phonology. Proceedings of the Annual Meetings on Phonology 2018.
      [https://doi.org/10.3765/amp.v7i0.4486]




                                                 26
Hyman, Larry M. (1970a). How concrete is phonology? Lg 46(1). 58–76.
      [https://doi.org/10.2307/412407]
Hyman, Larry M. (1970b). The role of borrowing in the justification of phonological grammars.
      Studies in African Linguistics 1. 1–48.
Inkelas, Sharon & Cheryl Zoll (2007). Is grammar dependence real? A comparison between
      cophonological and indexed constraint approaches to morphologically conditioned phonology.
      Linguistics 45. 133-171. [https://doi.org/10.1515/LING.2007.004]
Ito, Chiyuki & Michael Kenstowicz (2015). The adaptation of contemporary Japanese loanwords in
      Korean. Japanese/Korean Linguistics 22. 1–18.
Ito, Junko & Armin Mester (1995). The core-periphery structure of the lexicon and constraints on
      reranking. In Jill Beckman, Suzanne Urbanczyk & Laura Walsh Dickey (eds.) Papers in
      Optimality Theory. Amherst: GLSA. 181–209.
Ito, Junko & Armin Mester (1999). The structure of the phonological lexicon. In Natsuko Tsujimura
      (ed.) The handbook of Japanese linguistics. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 62–100.
Jacobs, Haike (2014). Modelling loanword adaptation. In Eugeniusz Cyran & Jolanta Szpyra–
      Kozlowska (eds.) Crossing phonetics-phonology lines. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars
      Publishing. 191–217.
Jacobs, Haike & Carlos Gussenhoven (2000). Loan phonology: perception, salience, the lexicon and
      OT. In Joost Dekkers, Frank van der Leeuw & Jeroen van de Weijer (eds.) Optimality Theory:
      phonology, syntax, and acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 193–209.
Jaggers, Zachary (2018). A combined sociolinguistic and experimental phonetic approach to loanword
      variation and adaptation. PhD dissertation, New York University.
Jaggers, Zachary & Melissa M. Baese-Berk (2020). Investigating a bias for cue preservation in
      loanword adaptation. JASA 147(6). EL511–EL516. [https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0001375]
Jian, Li (2017). Tonal adaptation of English loanwords in contemporary Mandarin. Journal of Chinese
      Linguistics 45(2). 423–450. [https://doi.org/10.1353/jcl.2017.0018]
Jurgec, Peter (2014). Morphology affects loanword phonology. NELS 43. 191–202.
Kabak, Bariş & William J. Idsardi (2007). Perceptual distortions in the adaptation of English
      consonant clusters: syllable structure or consonantal contact constraints?. Language and
      Speech 50(1). 23–52. [https://doi.org/10.1177/00238309070500010201]




                                                  27
Kadenge, Maxwell & Calisto Mudzingwa (2012). Comparing chiShona loanwords of monolingual and
      bilingual speakers: an Optimality Theory analysis. South African Journal of African Languages
      32(2). 141–151. [https://doi.org/10.2989/SAJAL.2012.32.2.5.1142]
Kang, Yoonjung (2003). Perceptual similarity in loanword adaptation: English postvocalic word-final
      stops in Korean. Phonology 20(2). 219–273. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675703004524]
Kang, Yoonjung (2011). Loanword phonology. In Marc van Oostendorp, Colin Ewen, Elizabeth Hume
      & Keren Rice (eds.) Blackwell companion to phonology. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 2258–
      2282.
Kang, Yoonjung (2013). Loanwords. Oxford Bibliographies Online.
      [https://doi.org/10.1093/OBO/9780199772810-0027]
Kang, Yoonjung, Andrea Hò a Phạ m & Benjamin Storme (2016). French loanwords in Vietnamese: the
      role of input language phonotactics and contrast in loanword adaptation. Proceedings of the
      Annual Meetings on Phonology 2014. [https://doi.org/10.3765/amp.v2i0.3749]
Kang, Yoonjung & Jessamyn Schertz (2021). The influence of perceived L2 sound categories in on-
      line adaptation and implications for loanword phonology. NLLT 39. 555–578.
      [https://doi.org/10.1007/s11049-020-09477-9]
Kawahara, Shigeto (2012). Lyman's Law is active in loanwords and nonce words: evidence from
      naturalness judgment studies. Lingua 122(11). 1193–1206.
      [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2012.05.008]
Kawahara, Shigeto (2013). Testing Japanese loanword devoicing: addressing task effects. Linguistics
      51(6). 1271–1299. [https://doi.org/10.1515/ling-2013-0050]
Kennard, Holly J. & Aditi Lahiri (2020). Nonesuch phonemes in loanwords. Linguistics 58(1). 83–
      108. [https://doi.org/10.1515/ling-2019-0033]
Kenstowicz, Michael J. & Teresa Cabré (eds.) (2012). On loanword phonology [special issue]. Catalan
      Journal of Linguistics 11. [https://revistes.uab.cat/catJL/issue/view/v11]
Kenstowicz, Michael J. & Christian Uffmann (eds.) (2006). Loanword phonology: current issues
      [special issue]. Lingua 116(7).
      [https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/lingua/vol/116/issue/7]
Kiegel-Keicher, Yvonne (2020). Simple metathesis in loanword phonology: the Arabic-Romance
      language contact. Zeitschrift für romanische Philologie 136(4). 1049–1084.
      [https://doi.org/10.1515/zrp-2020-0057]




                                                 28
Kim, Jungyeon (2021). Perception of foreign segments in loanword phonology. Lingua 262. 103–160.
      [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2021.103160]
Kiparsky, Paul. 1968. How abstract is phonology? In Osamu Fujimura (ed.) Three dimensions of
      linguistic theory. Tokyo: TEC. 5–56.
Kiparsky, Paul (1982 [1971]). Historical linguistics. Explanation in phonology. Dordrecht: Foris. 57–
      80.
Kisseberth, Charles (1970). On the functional unity of phonological rules. LI 1. 291–306.
      [https://www.jstor.org/stable/4177568]
Kwon, Harim (2017). Language experience, speech perception and loanword adaptation: variable
      adaptation of English word–final plosives into Korean. JPh 60. 1–19.
      [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2016.10.001]
Laidler, Kateryna (2023). The interaction of orthography, perception, and phonology in the
      adaptation of E /ɜː/ in loanwords into Russian. Przegląd Rusycystyczny 181. 180–206.
Leben, William R. (1980). A metrical analysis of length. LI 11(3). 497–509.
      [https://www.ceeol.com/search/article-detail?id=1172262]
Legendre, Géraldine, Yoshiro Miyata & Paul Smolensky (1990). Can connectionism contribute to
      syntax?: Harmonic Grammar, with an application. Report CU-CS-485-90. Computer Science
      Department, University of Colorado at Boulder.
Lev-Ari, Shiri & Sharon Peperkamp (2014). An experimental study of the role of social factors in
      language change: the case of loanword adaptations. Laboratory Phonology 5(3). 379–401.
      [https://doi.org/10.1515/lp-2014-0013]
Lev‐Ari, Shiri, Marcela San Giacomo & Sharon Peperkamp (2014). The effect of domain prestige and
      interlocutors’ bilingualism on loanword adaptations. Journal of Sociolinguistics 18(5). 658–
      684. [https://doi.org/10.1111/josl.12102]
Louriz, Nabila (2015). Loanword adaptation: phonetics or phonology?. Association Internationale de
      Dialectologie Arabe 2008. 47–64.
Lovins, Julie Beth (1973). Loanwords and the phonological structure of Japanese. PhD dissertation,
      The University of Chicago.
Massaro, Dominic W. & Michael M. Cohen (1983). Phonological context in speech perception.
      Perception & Psychophysics 34(4). 338–348. [https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03203046]




                                                  29
Mathieu, Lionel (2012). Orthographic traces in Romanian and Japanese loanwords: enriching
      phonological representations. Journal of Language Contact 5(1). 144–181.
      [https://doi.org/10.1163/187740912X624450]
Mattingley, Wakayo, Elizabeth Hume & Kathleen Currie Hall (2015). The influence of preceding
      consonant on perceptual epenthesis in Japanese. Proceedings of the International Congress of
      Phonetic Sciences 18. 888:1–5. [https://www.internationalphoneticassociation.org/icphs-
      proceedings/ICPhS2015/Papers/ICPHS0888.pdf]
McCarthy, John J. & Alan Prince (1994). The emergence of the unmarked: optimality in Prosodic
      Morphology. NELS 24. 333–379.
McCarthy, John & Alan Prince (1999). Faithfulness and identity in Prosodic Morphology. In René
      Kager, Harry van der Hulst & Wim Zonneveld (eds.) The prosody-morphology interface.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 218–309.
Michel, Jean-Baptiste, Yuan Kui Shen, Aviva Presser Aiden, Adrian Veres, Matthew K. Gray, William
      Brockman, The Google Books Team, Joseph P. Pickett, Dale Hoiberg, Dan Clancy, Peter Norvig,
      Jon Orwant, Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak & Erez Lieberman Aiden (2011). Quantitative
      analysis of culture using millions of digitized books. Science 331(6014). 176–182.
      [https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1199644]
Morita, Takashi & Timothy J. O’Donnell (2022). Statistical evidence for learnable lexical subclasses in
      Japanese. LI 53(1). 87–120. [https://doi.org/10.1162/ling_a_00401]
Natvig, David (2017). A model of underspecified recognition for phonological integration: English
      loan vowels in American Norwegian. Journal of Language Contact 10(1). 22–55.
      [https://doi.org/10.1163/19552629-01001003]
Nomura, Jun & Keiichi Ishikawa (2018). Effects of first language processes and representations on
      second language perception: the case of vowel epenthesis by Japanese speakers. International
      Journal of Bilingualism 22(1). 69–87. [https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006916654997]
Oh, Mira (2012). Adaptation of English complex words into Korean. Journal of East Asian Linguistics
      21. 267–304. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s10831-012-9089-4]
Paradis, Carole (1995). Native and loanword phonology as one: constraints vs. rules. Proceedings of
      the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences 13(3). 74–81. [https://www.coli.uni-
      saarland.de/groups/BM/phonetics/icphs/ICPhS1995/13_ICPhS_1995_Vol_3/p13.3_074.pdf]
Paradis, Carole & Darlene LaCharité (1997). Preservation and minimality in loanword adaptation. JL
      33(2). 379–430. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022226797006786]


                                                  30
Paradis, Carole & Darlene LaCharité (2011). Loanword adaptation: from lessons learned to findings.
      In John Goldsmith, Jason Riggle & Alan C. L. Yu (eds.), The handbook of phonological theory,
      2nd edition. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 751–778.
Paradis, Carole & Darlene LaCharité (2012). The influence of attitude on the treatment of
      interdentals in loanwords: ill-performed importations. Catalan Journal of Linguistics 11. 97–
      126. [https://revistes.uab.cat/catJL/article/view/v11-paradis-laCharite%CC%81]
Peperkamp, Sharon & Emmanuel Dupoux (2003). Reinterpreting loanword adaptations: the role of
      perception. Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences 15. 367–370.
      [https://www.internationalphoneticassociation.org/icphs-proceedings/ICPhS2003/papers/
      p15_0367.pdf]
Peperkamp, Sharon (2015). Phonology versus phonetics in loanword adaptations. In Joaquín
      Romero and María Riera (eds.) The phonetics-phonology interface: representations and
      methodologies. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 71–90.
Phetkla, Chanuwan (2020). Vowel adaptation in English loanwords in Thai. PhD dissertation,
      Newcastle University.
Pinta, Justin (2013). Lexical strata in loanword phonology: Spanish loans in Guarani. MA thesis,
      University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Pons-Moll, Clà udia & Francesc Torres-Tamarit (2021). Catalan nativization patterns in the light of
      weighted scalar constraints. In Sergio Baauw, Frank Drijkoningen & Luisa Meroni (eds.)
      Romance languages and linguistic theory 2018. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 205–224.
Poplack, Shana. (2018). Borrowing: loanwords in the speech community and in the grammar. Oxford:
      Oxford University Press.
Prince, Alan & Paul Smolensky (2004 [1993]). Optimality Theory: constraint interaction in generative
      grammar. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Radomski, Marek (2019). Segmental adaptation of Polish voiceless affricates in CC consonant
      clusters by native speakers of English. Linguistica Silesiana 40. 121–137.
      [https://doi.org/10.24425/linsi.2019.129405]
Ravindranath, Maya (2015). Sociolinguistic variation and language contact. Language and Linguistics
      Compass 9(6). 243–255. [https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12137]
Rice, Curt (2006). Norwegian stress and quantity: the implications of loanwords. Lingua 116(7).
      1171-1194. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2005.05.008]




                                                     31
Ryu, Na-Young, Yoonjung Kang & Sungwoo Han (2020). The effects of phonetic duration on loanword
      adaptation: Mandarin falling diphthong in Chinese Korean. Language Research 56(2). 225–
      261. [https://doi.org/10.30961/lr.2020.56.2.225]
Sa'aida, Zainab Ahmad Mahmoud (2015). Aspects of the phonology of English loanwords in Jordanian
      urban Arabic: a distinctive feature, moraic, and metrical stress analysis. PhD dissertation,
      University of Leeds.
Saciuk, Bohdan. 1969. The stratal division of the lexicon. Papers in Linguistics 1. 464–532.
      [https://doi.org/10.1080/08351816909389128]
Sano, Shin-ichiro (2012). Patterns in the avoidance of marked segmental configurations in Japanese
      loanword phonology. Proceedings of GLOW in Asia 9. 245–260.
Shafi, Sehrish (2017). A phonological analysis of English loanwords in Mirpur Pahari: exploring
      variable adaptation in Optimality Theory. PhD dissertation, University of York.
Shinohara, Shigeko (2004). Emergence of universal grammar in foreign word adaptation. In René
      Kager, Joe Pater & Wim Zonneveld (eds.) Constraints in phonological acquisition. Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press. 292–320.
Shinohara, Shigeko, Seong-Rim Ji, Tomohiko Ooigawa & Takahito Shinya (2011). The limited role of
      perception in Korean loanword adaptation: the Korean three-way laryngeal categorization of
      Japanese, French, English and Chinese plosives. Lingua 121(9). 1461–1484.
      [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2011.04.001]
Silverman, Daniel (1992). Multiple scansions in loanword phonology: evidence from Cantonese.
      Phonology 9(2). 289–328. [https://www.jstor.org/stable/4420058]
Simonović, Marko (2015). Lexicon immigration service: prolegomena to a theory of loanword
      integration. PhD dissertation, Utrecht University.
Skousen, Royal (1972). On capturing regularities. CLS 8. 567–578.
Smith, Jennifer L. (2006). Loan phonology is not all perception: evidence from Japanese loan
      doublets. Japanese/Korean Linguistics 14. 63–74.
Smith, Jennifer L. (2009). Source similarity in loanword adaptation: Correspondence Theory and the
      posited source-language representation. In Steve Parker (ed.) Phonological argumentation:
      essays on evidence and motivation. London: Equinox. 155–177.
Smith, Jennifer L. (2018). Stratified faithfulness in Harmonic Grammar and emergent core-periphery
      structure. In Ryan Bennett, Andrew Angeles, Adrian Brasoveanu, Dhyana Buckley, Nick




                                                   32
      Kalivoda, Shigeto Kawahara, Grant McGuire & Jaye Padgett (eds.) Hana-bana: a festschrift for
      Junko Ito and Armin Mester. 13:1–22. [https://itomestercelebration.sites.ucsc.edu/]
Smith, Jennifer L. & Yuka Tashiro (2019). Nonce-loan judgments and impossible-nativization effects
      in Japanese. Proceedings of the Linguistic Society of America 4(1). 26:1–14.
      [https://doi.org/10.3765/plsa.v4i1.4531]
Smolensky, Paul (1996). The initial state and ‘richness of the base’ in Optimality Theory. Technical
      Report JHU-CogSci-96-4. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University. Available as ROA-154 from
      the Rutgers Optimality Archive. [http://roa.rutgers.edu/article/view/165]
Song, Jiyeon (2022). Illusory vowels and the North Kyungsang Korean vowel merger in English
      loanword adaptation into Korean. PhD dissertation, University of South Carolina.
Stampe, David (1973). On chapter nine. In Michael Kenstowicz & Charles Kisseberth (eds.) Issues in
      phonological theory. The Hague: Mouton. 44–52.
Steriade, Donca (2000). Lexical conservatism and the notion base of affixation. Ms, University of
      California, Los Angeles. Available (August 2024) at
      https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Donca-Steriade/publication/248721860_Lexical_cons
      ervatism_and_the_Notion_Base_of_Affixation/links/54e7b3560cf27a6de10ad1b3/Lexical-
      conservatism-and-the-Notion-Base-of-Affixation.pdf.
Stoltzfus, Daniel Paul (2014). Predictions on markedness and feature resilience in loanword
      adaptation. PhD dissertation, Université Laval.
Stanley, Richard S. (1967). Redundancy rules in phonology. Lg 43. 393–436.
      [https://doi.org/10.2307/411542]
Szpyra-Kozłowska, Jolanta (2016). Perception? Orthography? Phonology? Conflicting forces behind
      the adaptation of English /ɪ/ in loanwords into Polish. Poznań Studies in Contemporary
      Linguistics 52(1). 119–147. [https://doi.org/10.1515/psicl-2016-0001]
Thomason, Sarah Grey & Terrence Kaufman (1988). Language contact, creolization, and genetic
      linguistics. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Traoré, Yranahan & Caroline Féry (2019). Syllable structure and loanword adaptation in Frò ʔò .
      African linguistics across the disciplines: selected papers from the Annual Conference on African
      Linguistics 48. 1–28.
      [https://library.oapen.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12657/23428/1006722.pdf?
      sequence=1#page=7]




                                                    33
Uffmann, Christian (2006). Epenthetic vowel quality in loanwords: empirical and formal issues.
      Lingua 116(7). 1079–1111. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2005.06.009]
Uffmann, Christian (2013). Loanword adaptation. In Patrick Honeybone & Joseph Salmons (eds) The
      Oxford Handbook of Historical Phonology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 644–666.
Van Coetsem, Frans (1988). Loan phonology and the two transfer types in language contact. Berlin:
      De Gruyter.
Van Coetsem, Frans (2000). A general and unified theory of the transmission process in language
      contact. Heidelberg: Winter.
Vendelin, Inga & Sharon Peperkamp (2006). The influence of orthography on loanword adaptations.
      Lingua 116(7). 996–1007. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2005.07.005]
Wang, Wei (2023). L2 proficiency level influences loanword adaptation: variable adaptation of
      English co-occurrence of low vowel and nasal into Mandarin. Sage Open 13(4).
      21582440231202297. [https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440231202297]
Weinreich, Uriel (1968). Languages in contact: findings and problems. The Hague: Mouton.
Yeung, Alex Hong–Lun (2020). Revisiting phonotactic repairs in Cantonese loanword phonology: it’s
      all about sC. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 29. 279–309. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s10831-
      020-09212-w]
Yip, Moira (1993). Cantonese loanword phonology and Optimality Theory. Journal of East Asian
      Linguistics 2(3). 261–291. [https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01739135]
Yun, Suyeon (2019). English Loanword Adaptation in Telugu. Studies in Linguistics 53. 75–94.
      [https://doi.org/10.17002/sil..53.201910.75]
Zuraw, Kie, Kathleen Chase O’Flynn & Kaeli Ward (2019). Non–native contrasts in Tongan loans.
      Phonology 36(1). 127–170. [https://doi.org/10.1017/S095267571900006X]
Zwicky, Arnold (1975). The strategy of generative phonology. In Wolfgang U. Dressler & F. V. Mareš
      (eds) Phonologica 1972. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag. 151–165.




                                                 34
