                                                 Chapter 15
Segmental Phonetics and Phonology in Caucasian languages
                                                  Gašper Beguš
                                        University of California, Berkeley



Preprint of: Gašper Beguš. 2021. Segmental Phonetics and Phonology in Caucasian languages.
In The Oxford Handbook of Languages of the Caucasus, edited by Maria Polinsky. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190690694.013.18

Print Publication Date: Feb 2021 Online Publication Date: Jan 20211

                                                       Abstract

This chapter surveys the major topics of Caucasian segmental phonetics and phonology, focusing on
topics with broader implications for general phonetic and phonological theory. The author first presents
an acoustic phonetic analysis of phonemic inventories in the three Caucasian families, including both a
review of recent instrumental data on the topic as well as a new analysis of new and existing experimental
acoustic data. This analysis focuses on four primary topics: obstruents with different laryngeal features,
typologically unusual segments, small vocalic inventories, and pharyngealization. The new acoustic data
from a nonce-word experiment in Georgian and Megrelian offer evidence that aspiration in voiceless
stops gradually, yet significantly shortens if another voiceless stop precedes the relevant one in a given
word. The second part reviews analyses of Caucasian phonotactics, primarily of South Caucasian
consonant clusters that play a crucial role in discussions on production versus perception in phonology.
The chapter concludes with a collection of phonological alternations that have potential for future
research on phonology. Keywords: acoustic phonetics, naturalness in phonology, laryngeal features,
consonant clusters, ejective obstruents, double articulation, aspiration dissimilation, pharyngeals,
epiglottals, final voicing




1 Introduction

        Prominent characteristic features of Caucasian phonetics and phonology include large
consonantal versus small vocalic inventories in Northwest Caucasian, extensive consonant
clusters in Kartvelian, and a large number of phonemes with place of articulation in the postvelar
parts of the vocal tract in Nakh-Dagestanian languages. Common to all three families is a three-
way distinction in the laryngeal features of obstruents, with ejectives. It is safe to say that beyond
these focal topics, segmental phonetics and phonology of Caucasian languages are severely

1
    Note: some references might be missing in the preprint version. Check the published version.



                                                           1
understudied. This chapter outlines the main characteristics of Caucasian phonetics and
phonology, focusing on processes that bear broader implications for general phonetics and
phonological theory. Many questions remain open even for the well-studied aspects of Caucasian
phonology. For some of these questions, I have tried to offer new insights using experimental
data or relying on the reanalysis of existing data. I also discuss areas of Caucasian phonology
that went largely unnoticed but have a potential to provide insightful and broadly relevant results
with future research.

        Many treatments of Caucasian phonology include detailed qualitative phonetic
descriptions, but quantitative acoustic analyses are still lacking with few notable exceptions.
Section 15.2 is an attempt to fill this gap; for each language family, I discuss aspects of
consonantal and vocalic inventories that are most relevant for phonetic typology. I present new
experimental data for Kartvelian: for the purpose of examining various aspects of Kartvelian
phonetics, I conducted an experiment involving 12 speakers of Georgian and one speaker of
Megrelian (Beguš, 2017). For Northwest Caucasian, I present new analyses of already existing
data, primarily from Ubykh. Section 15.3 describes the phonotactics and focuses on Kartvelian
consonant clusters, which have played a major role in the development of articulatory
approaches to phonology and are relevant for the discussion on the role of production versus
perception in phonology. The final section discusses active phonological alternations in
Caucasian languages, including those that received due attention as well as those that went
largely unnoticed but are directly relevant to the focal topics of current phonological theories.

2 Phonemic Inventories

      This section discusses the main characteristics of phonemic inventories across the three
Caucasian families.

2.1 Kartvelian

Phonemic inventories are relatively similar across the Kartvelian family. The main
characteristics are the symmetrical five-vowel system, a three-way opposition in laryngeal
features of stops and affricates (voiced, voiceless aspirated, ejective), and a two-way opposition
of laryngeal features in fricatives (voiced and voiceless). The common places of articulation are
bilabial, labio-dental, dental or alveolar, post-alveolar, velar, uvular, and glottal. Table 15.1
illustrates the Kartvelian languages’ consonantal inventories; Table 15.2 presents their vocalic
inventories.

/χ, ʁ/ are usually analyzed as velar /x, ɣ/ in Georgian and Megrelian. /q/ is limited to Svan, /j/ is
absent from Georgian, /ʔ/ is a phoneme only in Megrelian. Svan has /w/ instead of /v/; in Laz and
Megrelian, [v] and [w] are allophonic.

Table 1: Combined consonantal inventories of Kartvelian languages.
            bilab.     l.-d.    dent.       alveo.       post-al.   pal.     vel.      uvul.   glot.
stop      ph, b, p’            th, d, t’                                   kh, ɡ, k’   q, q’    ʔ
affricate                                  ʦ, dz, ʦ’ ʧ, ʤ, ʧ’


                                                     2
nasal            m                                      n
tap/trill                                              ɾ/r
fricative                     v                       s, z        ʃ, ʒ                     χ, ʁ   h
approx.                                                                         j
lat. appr.                                             l
Note: Harris (1991c); Lacroix (2009); Shosted and Chikovani (2006); and Tuite (1998a).



                                   front                      central               back
          high      i (y)                                                            u
     open-mid                     ɛ (œ)                           ə                  ɔ
           low                     (æ)                            ɑ
Table 2: Kartvelian vowel inventories
Note: Holisky (1991), Shosted and Chikovani (2006).




       Georgian and Laz have five-vowel systems: /a, ɛ, ɔ, i, u/. Schwa is limited to Svan and
Megrelian; in the latter, it is a back vowel (Harris, 1991c). Svan also has fronted /æ, oe, y/ (by
umlaut; Tuite, 1998a). Upper Bal and Lashx dialects of Svan additionally feature length
opposition (Tuite, 1998a).

        Laryngeal features are among the better-studied aspects of Kartvelian phonetics. This is
not surprising, as Georgian is one of the more accessible languages with ejective stops. This
section focuses on laryngeal features and discusses crucial information that these languages bring
for phonetic typology of ejective obstruents. I survey previous acoustic data on laryngeal features
in Kartvelian and provide new information on phonetics of ejective, aspirated, and voiced stops
in Georgian.

2.1.1 Phonation

The exact phonetic realization of the three laryngeal features is subject to extensive debate. The
first point of dispute is the phonetic realization of Georgian voiced series of stops
(Butskhrikidze, 2002; Grawunder, Simpson, & Khalilov, 2010; Shosted & Chikovani, 2006;
Vicenik, 2010; Wysocki, 2004). While most studies analyze the voiced series as phonetically
voiced (Shosted & Chikovani, 2006; Vicenik, 2010), recurring proposals have claimed that
voiced stops are phonetically voiceless and characterize the Georgian voiced/voiceless-aspirated
opposition in terms of presence or absence of aspiration (Robins & Waterson, 1952; Wysocki,
2004).

        Wysocki (2004) argues in favor of the latter approach and bases their claims on the fact
that the phonetic realization of most absolute initial voiced stops features no phonation during
closure. However, it is not clear that absolute word-initial position should be representative;
phonation is dispreferred in absolute initial position for articulatory reasons (Davidson, 2016;
Solé, 2011). Vicenik (2010) measured the rate of phonation into closure in Georgian post-vocalic
stops, word-initially and wordfinally. On average, 75% of closure is voiced in voiced stops,


                                                             3
compared to 17% in voiceless aspirated and 27% in ejectives. The difference in voicing into
closure between voiced versus voiceless stops/ejectives is significant, the difference among the
latter two is not, for most places of articulation. Vicenik (2010) measures voicing into closure as
a function of prosodic position: voicing into closure does not differ significantly in word-initial
position after a vowel-final carrier phrase versus word-medial intervocalic position; the rates of
voicing during closure do not significantly differ between the two conditions, except for velar
stops. For velars, a significantly greater proportion of closure is voiced intervocalically, but the
absolute duration of voicing during closure remains the same (Vicenik, 2010).

        Our experimental data align well with these results. Twelve speakers of Georgian were
instructed to read 675 nonce words of the structure CVCVCV. Voicing into closure was not
quantified in the study, but acoustic inspection aligns well with the conclusion that the “voiced”
series of stops in Georgian is in fact phonetically voiced in intervocalic position.
Impressionistically, most speakers have at least half of the closure or more voiced (Figure 15.1).
Based on these observations and backed by the study in Vicenik (2010), we can maintain the
analysis that the unaspirated series of Georgian stops is phonetically and phonologically voiced:
the amount of phonation into closure is substantial enough and significantly different for voiced
stops compared to ejectives and voiceless aspirated that it likely does not result from automatic
phonetic voicing in postvocalic position (cf. Wysocki, 2004).

        Our recordings also reveal an aspect of voiced-stop realization that received less attention
so far but has the potential to shed further light on the system of laryngeal features in Georgian.
There exists a good amount of variation in the realization of voiced stops among speakers, but
relatively little within-speaker variation (although this observation is not quantified in our study).
Speakers vary in the production of the intervocalic voiced stops to the degree that for some
speakers, closure is consistently fully voiced, whereas for others, almost no phonation into the
closure is present. Spectrograms and waveforms in Figure 15.1 illustrate this variation. Inter-
speaker variation in the production of voiced stops warrants further study. Variation in stop
production is attested not only for the voiced series but also for ejectives and aspirated stops. A
study that would test potential correlations between inter-speaker variability in closure voicing
with other phonetic parameters, such as VOT and burst intensity of the other two series of stops
is lacking and would shed light on the otherwise unclear distributions.

        A related issue has to do with what perceptual cues speakers employ in distinguishing
stops with different laryngeal features (Vicenik, 2010). It is possible that VOT duration (or
presence/absence of aspiration noise) is a more prominent cue than voicing into closure. Such a
hypothesis, however, should be tested with perceptual experiments. To my knowledge, no such
studies exist for any of the four languages.




                                                  4
     Figure 1: Waveforms and spectrograms of voiced stop [d] in the word [lixɔde] uttered by
                                     three different speakers



2.1.2 Phonetic properties of other laryngeal features

Three of more recent studies on Georgian phonetics present detailed acoustical analysis of stops
with respect to their laryngeal features (Grawunder, Simpson, & Khalilov, 2010; Vicenik, 2010;
Wysocki, 2004). Of the seven parameters measured (closure duration, VOT, voicing into closure,
relative burst intensity, F0, phonation type of the following vowel, and spectral measures of the
burst) in Vicenik (2010), only VOT duration and phonation type reliably distinguish all three
stop types in Georgian. VOT is longest in the voiceless aspirated series, shorter in ejectives, and
shortest in voiced stops. Vowels have significantly creakier phonation after ejectives and more
breathy phonation after voiceless aspirated stops. Voicing into closure distinguishes voiced stops
from voiceless aspirated and ejectives, but not ejectives from voiceless aspirated. F0 in the
following vowel falls for voiced and voiceless aspirated but stays flat after ejectives; yet this
difference does not reach significance for all places of articulation. Mean frequency, skewness,
and kurtosis of the burst were significant predictors for only a subset of places of articulation,
according to Vicenik (2010).

        While several results in Wysocki (2004) and Vicenik (2010) are replicated in our
experiment, some are different. Our analysis confirms that stops with different laryngeal features
have significantly different VOT durations. We measured the VOT of the third stop in nonce
words of the CVCVCV structure, testing three places of articulation (bilabial, dental, velar) and
three laryngeal features (voiced, voiceless aspirated, ejective). VOT was significantly longer in
voiceless stops compared to ejectives (β = 36.1 ms, t = 9.8, df = 11, p < 0.0001) and significantly
shorter in voiced stops compared to ejectives (β = −18.1 ms, t = −6.1, df = 11, p < 0.0001) at the
means of other predictors (Beguš, 2017).

        Wysocki (2004), Vicenik (2010), and Grawunder, Simpson, & Khalilov (2010) all claim
that closure duration does not significantly differ across stops with different laryngeal features.
This is a surprising result as we know that closure duration of voiced stops is cross-linguistically
shorter at least compared to closure of voiceless stops (Lisker, 1957; Luce & Charles-Luce,
1985; Port, 1981). The results of our experiment, however, show a significant effect of laryngeal
features on closure duration. Closure duration is significantly shorter in voiced stops than in


                                                 5
ejectives (β = −5.0 ms, t = −3.3, df = 20, p < 0.01) and significantly longer in ejectives than in
voiceless aspirated stops (β = 3.7 ms, t = 3.0, df = 17, p < 0.01) at means of other predictors
(Beguš, 2017).

         This difference in closure durations between ejective and voiceless aspirated stops is, to
my knowledge, reported for the first time not just for Georgian but for ejective stops in general.
Warner (1996) measures closure duration in ejective versus voiceless stops in Ingush. Closure
duration was indeed shorter in plain unaspirated voiceless stops, but the difference did not reach
statistical significance. These measurements are based on recordings of only one speaker.

        Gordon and Applebaum (2006) measured closure duration of stops in Kabardian. They
find a significant effect of laryngeal features on closure duration, but the difference is significant
only for the difference between voiced and ejectives, not between ejectives and voiceless
aspirated stops. Maddieson, Rajabov, and Sonnenschein (1996) measured closure duration and
VOT of voiceless and ejective stops in Tsez and found no significant differences between the
two groups for either of the measured parameters. McDonough and Ladefoged (1993) found no
differences in closure duration between ejective and voiceless aspirated or unaspirated stops in
Navajo, but unaspirated stops have significantly longer closure durations than aspirated stops.
Similar results are obtained for Athabaskan Witsuwit’en in Hargus (2007): closure is longest in
unaspirated voiceless stops, but there is no significant difference in closure duration between
voiceless aspirated and ejective stops.

        The differences in closure durations across different stop types, despite being significant,
are relatively small in Georgian. We can safely maintain that such small differences do not
provide a prominent perceptual cue: in fact, they fall below the Just-Noticeable Difference ratio
for vocalic speech stimuli (about 0.055 in Nooteboom & Doodeman, 1980). The ratio of closure
duration difference between ejective and aspirated stops compared to the full closure duration is
0.045 in our case (i.e., below 0.055).

        Wysocki (2004) offers a detailed qualitative analysis of ejective stops in Georgian.
Realization of ejective stops is highly variable across speakers. Ejective stops feature an audible
oral release that is often higher in amplitude than the first period of the following vowel. Oral
release is followed by a period of silence that is interrupted by one or more glottal releases that
precede the vowel onset (Wysocki, 2004). Figure 15.2 illustrates acoustic characteristics of an
ejective stop in Georgian.

         Shosted and Chikovani (2006) also provide a qualitative airflow analysis of different stop
types in Georgian. Oral air flow of three initial dental stops are measured. Ejective stops feature
a relatively small rise in airflow that rapidly drops back to the zero level before the onset of the
vowel. This fall results from glottis being closed after the oral release: once the air flow between
oral closure and glottal closure is released, glottal closure prevents further airflow until it is
released and the vowel onsets. Volume of the ejective oral release is considerably lower than
airflow volume of voiced stops or voiceless aspirated stops. The latter have the highest volume
of air flow, although the distribution is not quantified in Shosted and Chikovani (2006).




                                                  6
       Figure 2: Waveform and spectrogram of a velar ejective stop in the nonce word
       [ʃɔk’ɔphu] uttered by a female speaker


2.1.3 Ejective stops and vowel duration

Vowel durations have long been known to differ before voiced and voiceless obstruents: vowels
are longer before voiced than before voiceless obstruents and this generalization has been
confirmed for over a dozen languages (cf. Chen, 1970, among others). The causes of these
durational differences are, however, poorly understood, and several competing explanations have
been proposed (Beguš, 2017). Opposing explanations arise primarily because most studies just
measure vowel duration before voiced and voiceless obstruents and disregard vowel duration
before obstruents with other laryngeal features. Only a subset of the studies measure vowel
duration as a function of aspiration of the following stop. While most studies argue that
aspiration lengthens the preceding vowel, some results are inconclusive (Durvasula & Luo, 2014;
Lampp & Reklis, 2004; Maddieson & Gandour, 1976; Ohala & Ohala, 1992). Measurements of
vowel duration before ejective stops are lacking altogether. Georgian is especially informative in
this respect as it features voiceless aspirated, ejective, and voiced stops, which makes it possible
to measure vowel duration differences before stops with all three laryngeal features.

        Beguš (2017) presents results from the experiment described above with nonce words of
the structure CVCVxCyV: vowel duration of Vx was measured along with the closure duration
and VOT of Cy. Vx included three vowels ([], [ɛ], and [ɔ]) and Cy involved all three laryngeal
features and three places of articulation (3 × 3 levels).

        A model with four predictors (Laryngeal Features, Vowel, Place, and Closure duration
reveals that vowels are significantly longer before voiced stops compared to ejectives (β = 8.7
ms, t = 7.1, df = 10, p < 0.0001) and significantly shorter before voiceless aspirated stops
compared to ejectives (β = −4.7 ms, t = −7.2, df = 11, p < 0.0001) (Beguš, 2017). This
generalization is called the “ejection effect” and is, to my knowledge, reported for the first time,
based on Georgian material. Closure duration is significantly, but only slightly negatively
correlated with preceding vowel duration (for ejective stops, β = −1.8, t = −2.4, df = 21, p < 0.05;
Beguš, 2017). There is a significant interaction between Laryngeal Features and Closure: closure


                                                 7
duration is significantly more negatively correlated with preceding vowel duration in voiced
stops compared to ejectives.

        Our experimental design also allowed us to model duration of VOT and its effect on
preceding vowel duration. As shown in section 15.2.1.2, VOT significantly differs across stops
with different laryngeal features. It is thus conceivable to assume that VOT duration is the
primary factor that determines preceding vowel duration. The results in Beguš (2017), however,
show that laryngeal features remain significant predictors even if we add VOT to the model.
Vowels are longest before voiced, shorter before ejective, and shortest before voiceless aspirated
stops. In addition, closure and VOT both inversely affect preceding vowel duration (Beguš,
2017).

        As argued in Beguš (2017), the “ejection effect” has broader implications: it shows that
laryngeal features are significant predictors of preceding vowel duration, even when effects of
closure and VOT are controlled for. Several competing proposals exist for the causes of vowel
duration differences before different stop types (Beguš, 2017; Chen, 1970). The results show that
voice feature or closure duration alone cannot be the cause of vowel duration differences.
Moreover, because laryngeal features remain significant predictors even when VOT and closure
duration are controlled for, and because the durational differences are small (smaller than the
Just-Noticeable difference threshold), perception is likely not the primary factor for durational
differences. The “ejection effect” primarily supports two hypotheses. The first is the Laryngeal
Accommodation hypothesis (Chomsky & Halle, 1968), according to which laryngeal features
require complex laryngeal gestures which in turn require different times to achieve. The second
is the Timing hypothesis (Kozhevnikov & Chistovich, 1967), which states that timing across
syllables tends to be constant: longer closure or VOT duration is compensated with shorter vowel
duration. Several factors may influence vowel duration and the new data from Georgian crucially
contributes to the discussion on causes of durational differences in vowels (Beguš, 2017).

2.1.4 Aspiration

Georgian voiceless aspirated stops are another aspect of Georgian phonetics that is relevant for
the discussion of the role of perception versus production in phonetics. Aspirated stops in
Georgian are characterized by long VOTs with high oral airflow (Shosted & Chikovani, 2006).
Least-square mean VOT duration of voiceless aspirated stops in our experiment (involving 2,630
tokens of aspirated stops in position CVCVCxV across the three places of articulation) is 75.4
ms (70.4 ms for labials, 72.8 ms for dentals, and 83.0 ms for velars).

        Georgian with its prominent aspiration provides insights into a process that has received
increased attention, especially recently (Garrett, 2015; Jatteau & Hejná, 2016; Ohala, 1993):
aspiration dissimilation (AD)—dissimilation of two subsequent aspirated stops (Th . . . Th > T . . .
Th or Th . . . T). While AD is well-documented and relatively common process, mechanisms that
underlie it are poorly understood. Two lines of thought emerge in the discussion. Ohala (1993)
explains the dissimilation in terms of perceptual hypercorrection: speakers assume that aspiration
of the two subsequent stops is a result of assimilation and “undo” this assimilation. Garrett
(2015), on the other hand, claims that motor planning errors are responsible for gradual
shortening of aspiration, which over time results in aspiration dissimilation. The articulatory



                                                 8
explanation predicts gradual and small phonetic differences in VOT duration, while the
perception explanation predicts catastrophic and total dissimilation. Gradual and small-
magnitude shortening of VOT supporting the articulatory explanation have already been reported
for Aberystwyth English (Jatteau & Hejná, 2016) and Halh dialect of Mongolian (Svantesson &
Karlsson, 2012). In both Halh and Aberystwyth English, however, the second stop is pre-
aspirated and not post-aspirated, which means that the measured aspiration duration in these
languages surfaces on the same vowel. Differences in aspiration duration have not yet been
established for a language with only post-aspirated stops (Jatteau & Hejná, 2016), such as
Georgian.

         To test the effect of preceding aspiration on VOT of the following aspirated stop, we
measured VOT duration of voiceless aspirated stops at three places of articulation, after three
vowels ([], [ɛ], and [ɔ]) in Georgian. The VCx sequences were embedded into two frames:
[rub_i] and [voth_i], i.e., a frame in which the first part ends in a voiced stop and a frame with
the first part ending in a voiceless aspirated stop. VOT of Cx was measured from the onset of
oral release until first periodic vibration with clear formant structure of the following vowel.
Altogether 213 tokens were analyzed. VOT was shorter in voiceless stops that were preceded by
another voiceless aspirated stop. Figure 15.3 illustrates by-speaker differences in VOT duration
as a function of preceding stop.

       The data were fit to a linear mixed effects model2 with preceding consonant Type,
preceding Vowel, and Place of articulation with Vowel × Place interaction as fixed effects and a
random intercept for Speaker. VOT is significantly shorter if another voiceless stop precedes (β
= −11.5 ms, t = −4.6, df = 192, p < 0.0001).

        The results bear implications for understanding of mechanisms behind aspirate
dissimilation process and for the discussion on perception versus production in phonetics: the
gradual effect of dissimilation of two post-aspirated stops in our experiment renders support for
the articulatory explanation.




        Figure 3: Boxplot of VOT duration across 12 speakers (top chart) and the effect of
        preceding consonant on VOT duration obtained from a linear mixed effects model with
        standard error bar.


2
 The linear mixed effects model was fit using the lme4 (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker 2015) and lmerTest
(Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2016) packages in R statistical software (R Core Team, 2016).



                                                       9
2.1.5 Megrelian, Laz, and Svan

The other three Kartvelian languages have similar phoneme inventories as found in Georgian
(see Tables 15.1 and 15.2), but have received considerably less attention. A detailed phonetic
analysis of Megrelian and Laz phoneme inventory is offered among others in Imnadze (1981).
Lacroix (2009) describes the Arhavi dialect of Laz, and Öztürk and Pöchtrager (2011) describe
the Pazar dialect of Laz.3

        While phonemic inventories are similar across Kartvelian, the phonetic realization of
phonologically identical segments can differ substantially, even in closely related languages or
even between different dialects of the same language. Melikishvili et al. (2011) measure several
acoustical parameters of ejective stops across Caucasian languages, including Northwest
Caucasian and Nakh-Dagestanian languages. The results suggest that the phonetic realization of
ejective stops differs across dialects and languages. The longest VOT was measured in Svan with
49 ms and the shortest, in the Gurian dialect and standard Georgian, 26 ms and 25 ms,
respectively (Melikishvili et al., 2011). Contrastive studies are helpful for the development of the
typology of ejective stops (Grawunder, Simpson, & Khalilov, 2010; Kingston, 2005), but further
studies with statistical analysis are needed to confirm differences in phonetic realization of
ejectives across Caucasian languages and dialects.

         In addition to the 12 speakers of Georgian, I also recorded a male speaker of Megrelian
reading the same 675 nonce words, but in a Megrelian carrier phrase. The confound of the
Megrelian experiment is that it only includes one speaker who reported to speak Georgian as a
first language and who spoke Megrelian in his home village with grandparents and relatives. For
the Megrelian speaker too, vowels are shorter before voiceless stops than before ejectives (β =
−5.1 ms, t = −2.1, df = 623.1, p < 0.05) and longer before voiced stops than before ejectives (β =
28.4 ms, t = 8.4, df = 613.4, p < 0.0001) at the means of other predictors. This suggests that the
ejection effect may be universal, at least for languages with similar realization of ejective stops
to those of Georgian and Megrelian (Beguš, 2017)

2.2 Northwest Caucasian

A prominent feature of Northwest Caucasian languages has to do with their large consonantal
and small vocalic inventories, shown in Tables 15.3 and 15.4 (see chapter 9; for counts, see
Catford, 1977).

                                        alv.-
           bilab.    l.-d.     alv.     pal. post-al. post-al.       pal.      vel.     uvul.    phar.     glot.
stop      p, b, p’           t, d, t’                                        k, ɡ, k’ q, q’                 (ʔ)
                             tw, dw,                                         kw, ɡw,
labial.    (pw’)               tw’                                             kw’ qw, qw’                  (ʔw)

3
 René Lacroix has also created and shared one of the largest databases of any Caucasian languages: Pan-dialectal
documentation of Laz [https://elar.soas.ac.uk/Collection/MPI546814] is an online database of 230 hours of high-
quality recording of four dialects of Laz with over 360 speakers recorded.



                                                        10
                                                                            kj, ɡj,
palat.                                                                       kj’       qj, qj’             (ʔj)
pharyn pʕ, bʕ,
g.      pʕ’                                                                           qʕ, qʕ’
phar.&l                                                                                qwʕ,
ab.                                                                                    qwʕ’
affricat                     ʦ, dz, tɕ, dʑ,        tŝ, dẑ,
e                             ʦ’       tɕ’ ʧ, ʤ, ʧ’ tŝ’
                                      tɕw,
                                     dʑw,
labial.                              tɕw’
nasal        m                  n
pharyn
g.           mʕ
tap/trill                      r/ɾ
fricativ           f, (f’),         ɕ, ʑ,
e                    [v] s, z, (s’) (ɕ’) ʃ, ʒ, (ʃ’) ŝ, ẑ, (ŝ’) (ç, ʝ)        x, ɣ       χ, ʁ     (ħ, ʕ)   h, (ɦ)
                                   ɕw, ʑw,           ŝw, ẑw,
labial.              (fw)           (ɕw’) (ʃw, ʒw) (ŝ w’)                    (xw)     χw, ʁw (ħw, ʕw) (hw)
palat.                                                                                 χj, ʁj
pharyn
g.                    vʕ                                                               χʕ, ʁʕ
phar.&l
ab.                                                                                   χwʕ, ʁwʕ
lat. fric.                  ɬ, (ɮ), ɬ’
approx.      w                                                       j
pharyn
g.           wʕ
lab.                                                                (ɥ)
lat.
appr.                           l


Table 3: Consonantal inventory of Ubykh
Note: From Catford (1977); Chirikba (2003a); Colarusso (1988); Fenwick (2011); Gordon and Applebaum
(2006, 2013); Hewitt (2004); and Smeets (1984). The “peculiar NWC” (Catford, 1977) series of laminal closed
post-alveolar sibilants (Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996, p. 162) is transcribed with ˆ (e.g. /ŝ/). For a discussion
on the phonetics of this series, see section 15.2.2.2. Some dialects of Adyghe (Hatkoy, Shapsugh) feature a
four-way opposition in obstruents (plain voiceless, aspirated, voiced, ejective; Gordon & Applebaum, 2013),
which is not represented in the table. For a detailed phonetic study of the four-way opposition in Circassian,
see Gordon and Applebaum (2013). Note that phonemic inventories can vary substantially across different
analyses, especially for coronal fricatives and affricates. Phonetic values of these two series can vary
substantially (see discussion in section 15.2.2.2 and in Gordon & Applebaum, 2013).




                                                      11
        This section focuses on acoustic phonetic aspects of large phonemic inventories; NWC
languages feature several typologically highly unusual segments that had been considered
impossible or unattested until they were discovered precisely in these languages. Where
available, I present a new acoustic analysis of typologically rare segments based on existing
recordings of Ubykh from online databases LaCiTO4 and the UCLA Phonetics Lab Archive. I
provide statistical analyses for observations that have already been established but have not yet
received quantified treatments. I also present an acoustic analysis of small vocalic inventories
that are highly variable and co-articuatorily influenced by the large consonantal inventories.

        Among NWC, Ubykh stands out as the system with the highest number of consonantal
phonemes: 80–85 (depending on the analysis; Fenwick, 2011). Moreover, Ubykh has the highest
number of consonantal phonemes of any language without clicks. It features three laryngeal
features: voiced, voiceless, and ejective; four secondary articulations: palatalized, labialized,
pharyngealized, and labialized and pharyngealyzed; six manners of articulation: stop, fricative,
affricate, nasal, approximant, and trill; and ten places of articulation: bilabial, labiodental,
alveolar, alveolo-palatal, two post-alveolar series (one of which is analyzed as retroflex or
subapico-palatal), palatal, velar, uvular, and glottal (Colarusso, 1988; Fenwick, 2011).
Descriptions vary in their analysis of Ubykh places of articulation, but they all point to a
disproportionately high number of segments in the post-alveolar and uvular regions. Other NWC
languages additionally feature pharyngeal place of articulation.



-low ə
+low a
Table 4: A typical NWC vocalic inventory consisting of only two phonemic vowels
Note: Colarusso (1988). See section 15.2.2.3 for discussion




2.2.1 Typologically rare segments

Unique to Ubykh is a complete series of plain, pharyngealized, labialized, and labialized and
pharyngealized uvulars that include voiceless aspirated and ejective stops as well as voiceless
and voiced fricatives (Colarusso, 1988). These oppositions result in segments as typologically
unusual as the labialized pharyngealized uvular ejective [qʕw’]. It has been hypothesized that
“rounding and pharyngealization are never distinctive within a language” (Jakobson, Fant, &
Halle, 1951, cited in Colarusso, 1988, p. 221). As shown by [qʕw’] and other labialized
pharyngealized consonants, Ubykh as well as some dialects of Abkhaz and Abaza (Chirikba,


4
 The LaCiTO database is available online: http://lacito.vjf.cnrs.fr/pangloss/corpus/list_rsc_en.php?lg
=Ubykh\&aff=Ubykh.



                                                         12
2003a) can feature both secondary articulations on a single segment. To my knowledge, no
language outside the NWC family features simultaneous labialization and pharyngealization.

        On the other hand, some of the most common stops, such as plain voiceless or voiced
velars /k/ and /g/ are marginal in Ubykh (as well as in Kabardian), appearing only in one
loanword each (Colarusso, 1988). Such mismatches between cross-linguistic frequency and
markedness are relevant for general constraint architecture of Optimality Theoretic frameworks
(Prince & Smolensky, 2004). Currently, the most widely accepted version of Optimality Theory
and Harmonic Grammar with restricted Con predicts less marked segments will be more frequent
in a given environment (Beguš & Nazarov, 2017; Hayes, 2016). Languages such as Ubykh pose
a problem for such predictions. Further experimental work is needed to confirm that speakers
internalize such “unnatural” restrictions.

         Unique to the Abzakh dialect of Adyghe are glottal stops with two secondary
articulations: the dialect features a contrast between plain /ʔ/, labialized /ʔw/, and palatalized /ʔj/
glottal stops (Catford, 1983). Secondary articulations on glottal stops are rare: palatalized /ʔj/ was
even considered impossible (Merlingen, 1977, cited in Catford, 1983) until the segment was
discovered in Abzakh. Catford (1983) presents spectrograms of plain versus palatalized glottal
stop: his analysis confirms an acoustic distinction between the two phonemes that is reflected in
the formant structure of the following vowel, although the effects are phonetically weak.
Labialized alveolar obstruents are a prominent feature of NWC languages. Labialization in
alveolar stops is realized as labial closure, and in fricatives as labial frication. For example, /tw/ is
realized as a typologically rare doubly articulated bilabio- alveolar [t͡p].

        Ubykh and Abkhaz have doubly articulated bilabio-alveolar stops (Colarusso, 1988). For
the purpose of examining acoustic properties of labialized alveolars in NWC, we analyze
recordings of Tevfik Esenç uttering words /dwa/ ‘awl’ and /da/ ‘now’ in isolation (from the
LaCiTO online database). Figure 15.4 shows spectrograms of these words. The labialized
alveolar is realized as a doubly articulated stop ([d͡b]). While it is possible that the weak but
abrupt rise in energy at about 15 ms before the full release in the spectrogram for /dwa/ shows an
alveolar release (before the labial release), further and more accurate recordings and articulatory
data are needed to confirm this analysis. The formant structure provides cues for acoustic
disambiguation of /d/ and /dw/: we observe lowering of all formants for the labialized stop, but
especially of F3 and F4.

        To test effects of doubly articulated stops on formants of the following vowel, we
measured formant values in the same recording from the LaCiTO database that contains three
repetitions of /dwa/ and two repetitions of /da/. Formants at 5% of vowel duration were measured
in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2015) with a modified Vowel Analyzer Praat script (Riebold,
2013). Labialization lowers F2 (Z = 1.86, p = 0.1) and F3 (Z = 1.74, p = 0.2), but with such small
sample size, no differences are significant (according to the Exact Two-Sample Fisher–Pitman
Permutation Test, based on the oneway_test function from the coin package; Hothorn, Hornik,
van de Wiel, & Zeileis, 2008). Further data with larger sample sizes in Abkhaz should yield
more conclusive results.




                                                   13
        Labialized alveolar stops (/dw/) that are realized as doubly articulated stops [d͡b]) also
appear acoustically distinct from plain labials (/b/). A recording of Ubykh words /abana/ and
/adwana/ from the LaCiTO database was analyzed. The recording contains three tokens of each
word. F1 is lower at 5% of vowel duration after /dw/ compared to position after a plain labial (Z
= 2.06, p = 0.1). F3 likewise lowers after /dw/ (Z = 2.20, p = 0.1). F2, however, is higher after
/dw/ compared to /b/ (Z = −2.05, p = 0.1), but none of these differences reach statistical
significance. Acoustically distinct is also the vowel preceding /dw/, compared to the vowel
preceding /b/, but again the differences are not statistically significant (according to the
Permutation Test).

        Based on the analysis above, we can conclude that Ubykh indeed has bilabio-alveolar
doubly articulated stops. While doubly articulated stops involving velar and labial closure are not
infrequent, those involving labial and alveolar closure are very rare. It has even been claimed
that no language features a bilabio-alveolar doubly articulated stop as a contrastive phoneme
(Maddieson, 1983). In light of these claims, Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996) suggest that
double articulation in Caucasian might be better analyzed as secondary articulation, based on the
articulatory description from Catford (1972; via Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996), who claims
that labial contact in the closure of doubly articulated stops is “light,” lips are protruded further
forward, and contact is made with the inner part of the lips. It is not immediately clear, however,
why these articulatory properties described in Catford (1972) would necessarily point to an
analysis with secondary articulation. It is also unclear what counts as a distinctive criterion for
distinguishing secondary articulation with complete closure from “true” double articulation.

         Since Maddieson (1983), other cases of bilabio-alveolar doubly articulated stops have
been found: Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996) present an analysis of Yelentye (spoken in Papua
New Guinea) as featuring truly bilabial-alveolar doubly articulated stops. Most analyses in the
literature thus rightfully maintain the double articulation status of labialized stops in NWC.

       While voiceless and voiced doubly articulated bilabio-alveolar stops are featured in other
languages such as Yelentye, no language outside NWC features doubly articulated bilabio-
alveolar ejective stops, such as Ubykh [t͡p’].

        Further articulatory studies of labialized alveolars, especially of the ejective series, in
languages such as Abkhaz, where labialized alveolars are also realized as doubly articulated
stops, should reveal further information about phonetic properties of these rare segments.

        The realization of labialized dentals in NWC also provides evidence for diachronic
origins of doubly articulated stops, which has, to my knowledge, not been discussed so far.
Ubykh and Abkhaz examples point to one potential source of doubly articulated stops:
labialization as secondary articulation.




                                                  14
       Figure 4: Spectrograms of /da/ ‘now’ (left) and /dwa/ ‘awl’ (right)


2.2.2 Fricatives

Another prominent feature of NWC phoneme inventories is the presence of a high number of
fricative phonemes. As summarized in Catford (1977) and Gordon and Applebaum (2013), a
canonical NWC inventory includes four sibilant fricative series: “apico- or lamino-alveolar” /s/,
alveolo-palatal /ɕ/, “apico-postalveolar (slightly velarized)” /ʃ/ (sometimes analyzed as retroflex,
e.g., in Fenwick, 2011), and the “peculiar NWC sibilant” /ŝ/. This latter is described as “laminal
closed post-alveolar” (in Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996, p. 162) and as a “hissing-hushing
sound” articulated with tongue tip “rest[ing] against the alveoles of the lower teeth” with “the
main articulatory channel [. . .] at the back of the alveolar ridge” (Catford, 1977, p. 290) and “not
produced with the sublingual cavity that often characterizes postalveolar fricatives
crosslinguistically” (Gordon & Applebaum, 2013). Adding laryngeal features to these four series
of sibilants coupled with labialization as secondary articulations, systems can feature up to 14
phonemic sibilant fricatives, e.g., in Bzhedugh (Catford, 1977) or Shapsugh (Gordon &
Applebaum, 2013) dialects of Adyghe. Figure 15.5 shows spectrograms of the four-way contrast
with contrastive labialization in two series in Ubykh (the spectral analysis was performed in
Praat, based on the recordings from the UCLA Phonetics Lab Archive). The spectrograms show
the generalization established for Kabardian (Gordon & Applebaum, 2006) and for sibilants in
general (Gordon, Barthmaier, & Sands, 2002): peak energy is higher for more anterior fricatives.
For spectral studies of Kabardian fricatives and their influences on formant structure of the
following vowel, see Gordon and Applebaum (2006); for spectrograms and X-ray tracings of
Ubykh and other NWC languages, see Colarusso (1988).

        Other NWC dialects can merge the four-way opposition into a three-, two-, or oneway
opposition (Gordon & Applebaum, 2013). The exact phonetic realization as well as analyses of
the four series of fricatives can vary substantially. For example, some NWC sibilants are
analyzed as “moderately retroflex”: /ʃ/ is analyzed as /ʂ/ in Ubykh in Fenwick (2011, p. 18; see
also Gordon & Applebaum, 2013). For a detailed phonetic treatment of NWC sibilants, see




                                                 15
Colarusso (1988), Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996), Gordon and Applebaum (2006, 2013),
Fenwick (2011, p. 19), and references therein.5

         Ejective fricatives are typologically even more informative. Gordon and Applebaum
(2006) present a detailed acoustic study of Kabardian fricatives. Kabardian features three
ejective fricatives, /f ’/, /ɬ’/, and /ʃ’/, which are typologically uncommon and for which very few
phonetic descriptions are available. Labio-dental ejective fricatives are particularly rare, attested
only in Kabardian, Abaza, and some dialects of Abkhaz (Colarusso, 1988); outside Caucasian,
the PHOIBLE database (Moran, McCloy, & Wright, 2014) lists only North American isolate
Yuchi as having /f ’/. Gordon and Applebaum (2006) provide valuable acoustic and articulatory
information about ejective fricatives. Ejective fricatives have shorter frication duration, smaller
frication intensity, and greater degree of constriction compared to their plain counterparts (based
on palatography). In fact, some tokens show complete oral closure. A period with complete
closure is not uncommon for ejective fricatives and is phonetically motivated (Kuipers, 1960, p.
46): closure increases intraoral pressure which facilitates an audible release of ejectives (Gordon
& Applebaum, 2006). Gordon and Applebaum (2006) measure intraoral pressure and oral flow
in [f] and [f ’], uttered by one Kabardian speaker. Intraoral pressure rises substantially in
production of the ejective fricative and is comparatively lower for the plain fricative. Airflow
data aligns well with airflow trajectories in ejective stops (Shosted & Chikovani, 2006): for plain
fricatives, it rises with frication and decreases only slightly before vowel onset. For ejective
fricatives, airflow raises and decreases back to the zero level before the onset of the following
vowel (Gordon & Applebaum, 2006).

        Ubykh only features one ejective fricative /ɬ’/, which is marginal. Figure 15.6 gives
spectrograms of two words read in isolation, /p’ɬ’ə/ ‘four’ (right) and /pɬə/ ‘red’ (left) from the
LaCiTO database. The main characteristics of ejective versus plain fricatives reported for
Kabardian are observed in Ubykh as well: frication duration is substantially shorter for the
ejective fricatives. The shorter frication is followed by a period of silence which results from
constricted glottis blocking the airflow. Noise in the plain fricative, on the other hand, is steady
throughout the frication duration.

        While most scholars accept the analyses of large consonantal systems in NWC presented
thus far, some attempts have been made to reduce the unusually large consonantal systems of
NWC languages by analyzing secondary articulations such as labialization and palatalization as
underlying sequences of consonants + glides /j/ and /w/, which would reduce the number of
phonemes across NWC languages substantially (discussion in Colarusso, 1988, p. 94). Colarusso
(1988, p. 94) provides crucial evidence against this proposal. The most convincing
counterevidence comes from the fact that there exist sequences of stop + /j/ in NWC that do not
change to the palatalized variant of the stop but surface as two segments.




5
    See chapter 9, for other descriptions and proposals concerning the place of articulation.




                                                                  16
Figure 5: Spectrograms of Ubykh sibilants: /s/ (upper left), /ŝ/ (upper middle), /ʃ/ (upper right),
/ɕ/ (lower left), /ɕw/ (lower middle) and /ʃw/ (lower right), based on recordings from the UCLA
Phonetics Lab Archive.




Figure 6: Spectrograms of /pɬə/ ‘red’ (left) and /p’ɬ’ə/ ‘four’ (right).



2.2.3 Vocalic inventories




                                                  17
Another prominent feature of NWC languages has to do with vertical vocalic inventories limited
to two or three vocalic phonemes, commonly described as /ə/, /a/, and sometimes /aː/. With a
two-way phonemic contrast in the vowel system, /a/ and /ə/, we can define vowels with a single
feature value, [±high], hence the term “vertical vowel system.”

         Ubykh is an example of such a system: it features two vocalic phonemes, /ə/ and /a/.
Some analyses include a third vowel /aː/, but this low vowel can also be analyzed as underlying
/ah/, /ha/, or /aa/ (Chirikba, 2003a; Colarusso, 1988). Some researchers claim that the distribution
of /ə/ and /a/ is predictable (Allen, 1956, 1965b; Kuipers, 1960) and posit only one vocalic
element for Ubykh. In other words, according to the onevowel analysis, /ə/ is an automatic
epenthetic vowel. It is true that /ə/ is often optional, can be deleted under certain circumstances,
and, as Colarusso (1988) notes, it “has a low functional load.” He, however, shows that there
exists strong evidence in favor of the phonemic status of /ə/ for all languages: Colarusso (1988,
pp. 347–373) offers a detailed discussion of cases in which /ə/ contrasts with ∅.

        The rest of this section focuses on acoustic analyses of small vocalic inventories. That the
two posited vowels have different phonetic values is confirmed by the analysis of Ubykh
recordings. The LaCiTO database contains a minimal pair, /bla/ ‘eye’ and /blə/ ‘seven’, uttered
in isolation. The spectrogram in Figure 15.7 clearly shows that the two vowels have different
qualities. For the low vowel /a/ at midpoint of vowel duration in a relatively neutral phonetic
environment, F1 = 745 Hz, F2= 1,712 Hz; for /ə/ F1 = 424 Hz, F2 = 1,958 Hz. These formant
values suggest that /a/ is phonetically relatively front and high, /ə/ is relatively high. Fenwick
(2011) transcribes the two vocalic phonemes as /ɜ/ and /ɨ/ to better reflect their phonetic values.
Vowel /aː/, regardless of its phonemic status, is phonetically lower than /a/ and therefore
transcribed as /ɐ/ in Fenwick (2011). Very similar analyses of vocalic inventories and their
phonetic values are proposed for other NWC languages, especially in Abaza and Abkhaz; for
Circassian languages the overall phonetic realization of vowels is reported to be comparatively
higher (Colarusso, 1988). For spectral measurements of Kabardian vowels and their
coarticulatory variation, see Choi (1991), Wood (1994), and references therein.

         Small vocalic inventories are often prone to a high degree of coarticulatory influence
from adjacent consonants. Colarusso (1988, p. 295) claims that “all tautosyllabic consonants tend
to color vowel to a greater or lesser degree.” For example, anterior consonants produce front
vowels, high consonants produce high vowels, rounded anterior consonants produce rounded
vowels, cf. Ubykh /tət/  [thɛth]; /swa/  [sɸoe] (Colarusso, 1988, p. 296). In Circassian,
alveolars are reported to change tautosyllabic /ə/ to a high [ɪ]. High variability of phonetic values
of Ubykh vowels is illustrated in Figure 15.8 that shows formant transitions in an utterance
/amɣjan jəkjanan/, from the LaCiTO database, analyzed in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2015).
Initial /a/ has values of F1 = 753 Hz and F2 = 1,552 at midpoint, similar to the values for /a/ in
isolation in Figure 15.7. All subsequent vowels are colored by palatalization: F1 lowers and F2
rises. The most radical coloring targets the schwa /ə/ between two palatalized velars /kj/ and /j/
to the degree that its F1 lowers to 415 Hz and F2 rises to 2,089 Hz with almost no transitions in
formant structure. Despite this heavy coloring, formants still tend to transition back to their
targets in the absence of coarticulatory influence of the following consonant. In pre-pausal
position, formants transition to their underlying vocalic targets, even after consonants with
secondary articulations. Figure 15.8 shows formants of /a/ in /ja/ in pre-pausal position that


                                                 18
clearly transition toward the target for /a/ in the second half of the vowel duration (F1 = 675 Hz,
F2 = 1,626 Hz). In other words, consonants do not fully color vowels in all positions: underlying
targets are still present and realized, despite some traditional descriptions implicitly suggesting
that vowels are colored completely.




                Figure 7: Spectrograms of /bla/ ‘eye’ (left) and /blə/ ‘seven’ (right)




Figure 8: Spectrograms of /amɣjan gjəkjanan/ (left) and /gja/ (right)



2.3 Nakh-Dagestanian

Nakh-Dagestanian phoneme inventories are also comparatively large, primarily due to a four-
way distinction in stop type in some languages (voiceless aspirated, voiced, ejective, and fortis),
a high number of phoneme segments in the post-velar part of the vocal tract (pharyngeal,
epiglottal, and laryngeal obstruents), and the phonemic status of secondary articulations such as
labialization (Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990). Compared to NWC, Nakh-Dagestanian languages
feature larger vocalic inventories, often with a length distinction. The number of Nakh-
Dagestanian languages and dialects and their variability in phonemic inventories is substantially
greater compared to Kartvelian or NWC. Here, two illustrative languages were chosen (for a
survey of phonemic inventories of most other languages, see Alekseev, 1998b; Bokarev et al.,



                                                19
1967; Hewitt, 2004; Job, 2004; Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990; Smeets, 2004; van den Berg, 2005a).
Tables 15.5 and 15.7 (with data from Chechen for the Nakh and from Archi for the Dagestanian
group) illustrate NEC consonantal inventories, Tables 15.6 and 15.8, their vocalic inventories.
Pharyngeal segments and pharyngealization are among the better-studied features of Nakh-
Dagestanian. Nakh-Dagestanian languages provide crucial information for the typology of
pharyngealization; some languages feature voiceless stops, voiced stops, and fricatives with
pharyngeal and epiglottal place of articulation as well as pharyngealization or epiglottization as
secondary articulation.

In what follows, I will discuss main acoustic properties of Nakh-Dagestanian phoneme
inventories, with a focus on pharyngealization. Because pharyngealization is also present in
NWC, data from NWC languages are included in this section to supplement the analysis. Several
aspects of pharyngeal place of articulation and pharyngealization as secondary articulation are
still unknown, both from acoustic as well as articulatory and perceptual perspectives.

Nakh-Dagestanian phoneme inventories are also comparatively large, primarily due to a four-
way distinction in stop type in some languages (voiceless aspirated, voiced, ejective, and fortis),
a high number of phoneme segments in the post-velar part of the vocal tract (pharyngeal,
epiglottal, and laryngeal obstruents), and the phonemic status of secondary articulations such as
labialization (Kibrik and Kodzasov 1990). Compared to NWC, Nakh-Dagestanian languages
feature larger vocalic inventories, often with a length distinction. The number of Nakh-
Dagestanian languages and dialects and their variability in phonemic inventories is substantially
greater compared to Kartvelian or NWC. Here, two illustrative languages were chosen: for a
survey of phonemic inventories of most other languages, see Bokarev et al. (1967), Kibrik and
Kodzasov (1990), Job (1994), Alekseev (1998), Smeets (2004), Hewitt (2004), van den Berg
(2005). Tables 5 and 7 (with data from Chechen for the Nakh and from Archi for the
Dagestanian group) illustrate NEC consonantal inventories, Tables 6 and 8, their vocalic
inventories.

                                                                                                                 phar./epi
              bilab.        l.-d.       dent.       alveo. post-al.            pal.        vel.        uvul.        gl.    glot.
            ph, b, p’,                th, d, t’,                                        kh, ɡ, k’,
stop            pː                        tː                                                kː qh, q’, qː              ʡ     ʔ
affricate                        ʦ, dz, ʦ’ ʧ, ʤ, ʧ’
nasal      m                          n
tap/trill                            r,r̥
fricative           v             s, z, sː    ʃ, ʒ                                           x            ʁ            ħ     h
approx.                                                                          j
lat. appr.                            l
Table 5: Chechen consonant inventory
Note: From Nichols (1994, 1997a); Sylak (2011). Ingush features a very similar consonant inventory: Ingush
lacks /pː/, /kː/, /dz/, and /ʤ/ but features an additional series, palatalized velars /kj, ɡj, kj’/ (Nichols, 2011).



                                       front                         central                back
                           -round               +round


                                                                   20
          high     i, iː                    y, yː                                         u, uː
          mid      ɛ, eː                                                                  o, oː
          mid     jɛ, iːe̯                 ɥœ, yːœ               ə                       wɔ, uːɔ̯
           low      æ                                          a, aː                     o̯a, ɔː
Table 6: Chechen vowels
Note: Note: From Nichols (1994, 1997a); Nichols and Vagapov (2004); Sylak (2011); cf. Komen
(2007a). Ingush vocalic inventory is similar with some differences primarily in mid vowels (as
described in Nichols, 2011). For Chechen and Ingush diphthongs, see Nichols (1994, 2011).


                bilab.       dent.         post-al.     pal.           (pre-)vel.              uvul.    phar.   glot.
              ph, b, p’,
stop              pː     th, d, t’, tː                             kh, ɡ, k’, kː qh, q’, qː                      ʔ
                                                                     khw, ɡw,
labial.                     tw, dw                                   kw’, kːw qw, qw’
affricate                 ʦ, ʦ’, ʦː’ ʧ, ʧ’, ʧː’
labial.                    ʦw, ʦw’ ʧw, ʧw’
lateral                                                                  k͡ʟ̝̊ , k͡ʟ̝̊’
lat. lab.                                                              ͡kʟ̝̊w, k͡ʟ̝̊’w
nasal             m            n
tap/trill                      r
fricative                   s, z, sː    ʃ, ʒ, ʃ                                             χ, ʁ, χː    ħ, ʕ     h
                           w w       w w w w
labial.                   s , z , sː ʃ , ʒ , ʃ                                            χ , ʁw, χːw
                                                                                           w

lateral                                                                  ʟ̝̊, ʟ̝, ʟ̝̊ː
lat. lab.                                                                ʟ̝̊w, ʟ̝̊ːw
approx.           w                                      j
lat. appr.                     l


Table 7: Archi consonant inventory
Note: From Kibrik (1994); Kibrik and Kodzasov (1990); Kodzasov (1977); Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996);
and Mikailov (1967).

                                   front                     central                      back
          high     i, iː                                                                  u, uː
     open-mid                               e, eː                ə                        o, oː
           low                                                 a, aː
Table 8: Archi vowels
Note: From Kibrik (1994); Kibrik and Kodzasov (1990).




                                                        21
2.3.1 Laryngeal features

As already mentioned, in addition to the “common” Caucasian three-way opposition in obstruent
types with three laryngeal features (voiceless aspirated, voiced, and ejective), Chechen, Ingush,
Batsbi, Andi, Avar, Lak, Lezgian, Dargwa, Tabasaran, Agul, Archi, and Tsakhur feature a
“fourth type” of stops (Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990). This series receives various different
analyses; they are labeled intensive, fortis, unaspirated, or geminated consonants (Catford, 1977;
Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990; Gaprindašvili, 1966; Hewitt, 2004). The characteristic features of this
series is lack of aspiration and phonetically longer closure. The exact phonetic realization differs
across languages; in some languages “fortis” stops are realized as geminates intervocalically
(e.g., in Lak, Dargwa, and Khinalug; Catford, 1977; cf. Gaprindashvili, 1966, Kibrik, Kodzasov,
& Olovjannikova, 1972), and in others as affricates (e.g., in Avar and Andi; Catford, 1977). A
four-way opposition in obstruent types is also present in the Hatkoy and Shapsugh dialects of
Adyghe (for a detailed phonetic study of the contrast there, see Gordon & Applebaum, 2006,
2013).

        Warner (1996) presents a study of laryngeal features in Ingush and confirms most of the
commonly-held phonetic generalizations concerning ejective stops. VOT in Ingush is, for
example, significantly longer in voiceless stops (M = 45.1 ms) and shorter in ejectives (M = 26.2
ms). Ejective stops lack noise after burst; there is a significant difference in average power of
post-burst noise between ejective and voiceless series, but no significant difference in average
peak burst power (replicated in Grawunder, Simpson, & Khalilov, 2010). Warner also reports an
audible effect of ejective stops on pitch of the following vowel. On average, the difference in
pitch value at the onset of following vowel is 26.2 Hz: pitch is higher after ejectives compared to
voiceless stops. The difference is significant both at the vowel onset as well as at fifth to seventh
period of the vowel. On the other hand, Warner (1996) found no significant difference in peak
burst power between the ejective and voiceless series. Likewise, no specific spectral
characteristics of burst in ejectives were observed.

        Hewitt (2004) reports a correlation between aspiration and ejection: ejectives appear
“more glottalized” in those dialects that have less aspiration and vice versa. This observation is,
however, not supported by any quantitative analysis. Further quantified treatments of
correlations in phonetic realization of different stop types could yield important insights into a
thus far unexplained variation (cf. also our observation of inter-speaker variation in stop
production in Georgian in section 15.2.1.1).

2.3.2 Lateral obstruents

Another notable feature of Nakh-Dagestanian languages is the presence of a large number of
lateral obstruents. Lateral fricatives can be voiceless (ɬ) or “fortis” (ɬː). Lateral affricates can be
voiceless (t͡ɬ), ejective (t͡ɬ’), fortis (t͡ɬː), or fortis ejective (t͡ɬː’) (Catford, 1977; Kibrik & Kodzasov,
1990). According to Catford (1977), the system with the highest number of lateral consonants is
Akhvakh, featuring seven contrastive consonants with lateral articulation (including the
approximant /l/).




                                                     22
              Archi exhibits typologically very rare velar lateral fricatives and affricates (Kodzasov,
1977; Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996). Archi features voiceless, voiced, geminate (or tense) pre-
velar lateral fricatives (/ʟ̝̊/, /ʟ̝/, and /ʟ̝̊ː/) as well as voiceless and ejective pre-velar lateral affricate
/k͡ʟ̝̊/, /k͡ʟ̝̊’/. Moreover, the voiceless and ejective affricate and voiceless and geminate fricative can
be phonemically rounded: /k͡ʟ̝̊w/, /k͡ʟ̝̊w’/, /ʟ̝̊w/ and /ʟ̝̊ːw/ (based on Kodzasov, 1977). Ladefoged and
Maddieson (1996) provide spectrograms of these segments and a qualitative description of their
acoustic properties. The pre-velar lateral fricative in Archi features strong frication and a close
proximity between the second and third formants. Articulatorily, these segments are produced
with tongue body constriction along the velum and the palate and with tongue tip “passively
lowered to the lower teeth” (Kodzasov, 1977, in Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996, p. 206). For
further acoustic measurements of these sounds, see Grawunder, Simpso, & Khalilov (2010), who
suggest that pre-velar realization of lateral fricatives and affricates is also found for some
speakers of Bezhta and Avar.

2.3.3 Pharyngeal place of articulation

As already mentioned, one of the major topics in phonetics of Nakh-Dagestanian is
pharyngealization. As Sylak (2011) points out, pharyngealization is rare in the world’s
languages: only 5% of languages surveyed feature pharyngeal place of articulation or
pharyngealization as secondary articulation (Maddieson, 1984). Most work on pharyngealization
centers on Semitic and North American languages, and comparatively fewer instrumental studies
have been done on Caucasian pharyngealization.

       There are opposing views in the general phonetic literature on the topic of articulatory
and acoustic aspects of consonants produced in the region between the uvula and the glottis:
pharyngeal/epiglottal place of articulation (Catford, 1983; Esling, 1996, 1999; Laufer & Condax,
1979a, 1979b; for surveys of post-velar articulations and their phonetic and phonological
properties, see Bessell, 1992; Moisik, 2013; Sylak-Glassman, 2014). For example, no consensus
has been reached on the question of whether languages can contrast epiglottal and pharyngeal
place of articulation, exactly which articulators are active (and in what ways) during the
production of these obstruents, or what the exact acoustic properties for each place of articulation
are.

        Nakh-Dagestanian languages provide crucial phonetic information for the typology of
segments in the radical part of the vocal tract (Catford, 1983; Esling, 1999; Kibrik & Kodzasov,
1990; Kodzasov, 1986; Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996; Nichols, 2000). Languages of the family
have a large number of phonemes with primary articulation between the glottis and uvula, the
most common of which are pharyngealized voiceless /ħ/ and voiced /ʕ/ fricatives. In some
languages, such as Chechen, the Nakh-Dagestanian pharyngeal series is produced at the
epiglottal place of articulation (Catford, 1983). Despite the rich inventory of post-velar sounds in
Nakh-Dagestanian, instrumental acoustic and articulatory studies of pharyngeal/epiglottal
obstruents are still lacking. The most informative for the discussion on differences between
pharyngeal and epiglottal place of articulation are the Burshag and Burkikhan dialects of Agul




                                                      23
(Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990; Kodzasov, 1986; cf. Magometov, 1970; Šaumjan, 1941). 6 These
dialects are reported to have a phonemic contrast between pharyngeal and epiglottal places of
articulation (Kodzasov, 1986; Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996). Agul features voiceless /ħ/ and
voiced /ʕ/ pharyngeal fricatives, and voiceless /ʜ/ and voiced /ʢ/ epiglottal fricatives. The Agul
phonemic inventory also contains epiglottal stop /ʡ/ (Catford, 1983; Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990).
Altogether, Agul has five phonemes between the uvular and glottal places of articulation.

        Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996) further show that the pharyngeal and epiglottal
fricatives are acoustically quite different: the epiglottal series is noisier, and its formant structure
resembles neighboring vowels more than that of the pharyngeal series. The latter is characterized
by a high F1 above 1,000 Hz and a small distance between the first and the second formant
(Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996, pp. 167–168). Some of these observations are illustrated by
spectral analysis: Figure 15.9 shows spectra of /ħ/ and /ʜ/ in words /ħatʃ/ ‘wolf ’ and /ʜæʧh/
‘apple’.




Figure 9: Spectra of /ħ/ (left) and /ʜ/ (right) analyzed in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2015) with
25 ms window length, at approximately midpoint of the fricative (where clear formant structure
was visible) from recordings of Agul at the UCLA Phonetics Lab Archive.

Recently, however, Esling (1999, 2010, 1997) and others (Heap, 1997; Moisik, 2013; Sylak-
Glassman, 2014) proposed that the distinction in Agul is not of place of articulation but rather of
manner of articulation: Esling argues that pharyngeal fricatives are fricatives, but that what
Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996) analyze as epiglottal fricatives are in fact trills. In other words,
all five obstruents in Agul are produced in the same epiglottal (aryepiglotto-epiglottal) region
and their primary distinction is in manner of articulation (see also Moisik, 2013). Sylak-
Glassman (2014) and Moisik (2013) even question the phonemic status of the two series in Agul.
The question of whether a language can phonemically distinguish pharyngeal and epiglottal
place of articulation of the same manner of articulation thus remains open for further research.




6
 Recordings of the Burkikhan dialect of Agul with examples of obstruents in the pharyngeal/epiglottal region are
available at the UCLA Phonetics Lab Archiveat[http://archive.phonetics.ucla.edu/Language/AGX/ agx.html].



                                                        24
2.3.4 Pharyngealization as secondary articulation

Nakh-Dagestanian languages also have pharyngealization as a secondary articulation. Kibrik and
Kodzasov (1990) distinguish two types of pharyngealization in Nakh- Dagestanian, which,
according to Nichols (2000), corresponds to the distinction between pharyngeal and epiglottal
places of articulation. The distinction between pharyngealization and epiglottalization as
secondary articulation is, however, problematic, and several open questions remain to be
answered (see Moisik, 2013, and references therein and discussion below).

       Pharyngealization has been analyzed as an autosegmental/prosodic feature on the basis of
pharyngeal spreading, where the pharyngealization feature spreads from one vowel/syllable in
the word to neighboring vowels/syllables (Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990; Schulze, 1997b; Sylak-
Glassman, 2014), e.g., in Lak or Archi (Anderson, 1997; Kibrik, 1994, cited in Sylak-Glassman,
2014, and Moisik, 2013). Pharyngeal spreading can be sensitive to stress or blocked by other
segments (Moisik, 2013; Sylak-Glassman, 2014).

        In NWC languages, pharyngealization is commonly analyzed as a secondary articulation
on consonants (Catford, 1983; Hewitt, 2004). In contrast, Nakh-Dagestanian pharyngealization is
most commonly analyzed as a property of the vowel or of the syllable, rather than a property of
the consonant (Kibrik & Kodzasov, 1990; Kodzasov, 1986; Maddieson, Rajabov, &
Sonnenschein, 1996; Nichols, 2011). In some languages such as Tsez or Rutul, pharyngealization
is analyzed as a property of both vowels and consonants (see Maddieson, Rajabov, &
Sonnenschein, 1996; Sylak-Glassman, 2014).

        Phonetic distinction between vocalic and consonantal pharyngealization is difficult to
draw, because both involve similar gestures: compression or contraction of the pharynx or
epiglottis that is simultaneous with vocalic or consonantal articulation (for complexity of
articulations, see Moisik, 2013). This means that analyses have to rely primarily on phonological
data. For example, as shown in Figure 15.10, pharyngealization in Ubykh, despite being
analyzed as a consonantal feature, affects the following vowel throughout its duration by
lowering the F1 and F3 values.

        For both families, there are X-ray tracings and spectral analyses of pharyngealization
(Gaprindashvili, 1966; Dzheyranishvili, 1959, via Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996; Catford,
1983; Colarusso, 1988), but acoustic studies sometimes yield contradictory results. The analysis
of acoustic effects of pharyngealization is complicated by several factors: pharyngealization is
not homogeneous in terms of where and how it is realized (primarily on the vowel or primarily
on the consonant) or in terms of place of articulation (pharyngealization vs. epiglottization). It is
thus not surprising that different studies report different results.

        Kingston and Nichols (1987) and Nichols (1997a) examine general acoustic effects of
pharyngealization as secondary articulation in Chechen and argue that pharyngealization
primarily affects formants of the vowel and VOT duration of the consonant. The authors show
that VOT duration of pharyngealized consonants is longer compared to plain voiceless or
ejectives (reported in Nichols, 2011, and Sylak, 2011). Nichols (1994) further reports “very
noisy aspiration” or “murmured” phonation in the VOT of pharyngealized voiceless and voiced



                                                 25
consonants. Moreover, F1 rises and F2 and F3 lower in the presence of pharyngealization. In
other words, pharyngealization “produces compaction” of the spectrum: “lowering and backing
of the low vowels and centralization of the others” (Nichols, 2011).

        Sylak (2011) measures formants of five male Chechen speakers and compares the
measurements with predicted formant values. The predicted values are calculated based on
source-filter theory and estimation of vocal tract parameters. His study confirms that
pharyngealization raises F1 values and lowers F2. No significant effects of pharyngealization
were found on F3. For some places of articulation, his measurements suggest that the secondary
articulation is in fact epiglottization rather than pharyngealization: Nichols (2011) claims the
same for Ingush. These claims can only be confirmed with further articulatory studies.

        Ladefoged and Maddieson (1996) and Catford (1983) report a study of pharyngealization
in Tsakhur and Udi (cf. Ibragimov, 1968, 1990). The most noticeable acoustic effect of
pharyngealization reported there is a substantial lowering of F3, for anything between 150–1200
Hz (depending on the vowel and language). Additionally, F1 is reported to raise, but not as
considerably. F2 lowers in /eʕ/ and /iʕ/ but rises in /aʕ/, /oʕ/, and /uʕ/. X-ray tracing of pharyngeals
in these two languages (Gaprindashvili, 1966) reveals the “curious tongue configuration. The
tongue root at about the level of the tip of the epiglottis bulges backward into the pharynx, while
a depression is formed in the dorsal surface of the tongue approximately opposite the uvula, with
a further upward bulge further forward in the tongue,” also called the “double bunching”
(Catford, 1983, p. 349; see also Bessell, 1992; Gaprindašvili, 1966; and Moisik, 2013).

        In Tsez, pharyngealization is reported to affect formants of the vowel both at vowel onset
as well as at its midpoint. The effects of pharyngealization differ across different vowel qualities
(Maddieson, Rajabov, & Sonnenschein, 1996). Pharyngealization is reported to raise F1 in all
five vowels measured, although the effect of F1 raising is greater for /i/ and /e/ compared to other
vowels. F2 is lower in pharyngealized /iʕ/, and /eʕ/, but higher in pharyngealized /aʕ/, /oʕ/, and /uʕ/
compared to their non-pharyngealized counterparts. The measurements are reported to yield
“complex” results for F3. Pharyngealization is reported to lower F3 significantly in /a/ and /u/.

        The magnitude of the effect of pharyngealization is greater at vowel onset compared to
the mid-point position (Maddieson, Rajabov, & Sonnenschein, 1996). Gaprindashvili (1966)
further suggests that the main acoustic effect of vocalic pharyngealization in Dargi is the
presence of the fourth formant in the region around 1280 Hz. Moisik (2013) and Sylak-
Glassman (2014) also report a number of studies that claim vowels adjacent to pharyngeal
fricatives get fronted or pattern phonologically as palatalizing vowels. Fronting is reported for
Avar in Sylak-Glassman (2014) (based on Charachidze, 1981), Kryz (based on Authier, 2009),
and Agul (based on Magometov, 1970). For example, /o/ and /u/ are realized as [oe] and [y] in
Avar if they are adjacent to a voiceless or voiced pharyngeal fricative: [gøħ] for /goħ/ ‘mountain’
(Sylak-Glassman, 2014). Moisik (2013) reports that pharyngealized vowels in Lak (based on
Anderson, 1997) and Bezhta (based on Kibrik & Testelets, 2004) cause phonological
palatalization. For example, in Lak /k/ and /l/ palatalize before pharyngealized fronted vowels.
Effects of pharyngealization are visible beyond formant structure and VOT. Grawunder,
Simpson, & Khalilov (2010) report that burst spectra differ for pharyngealized stops compared to
plain stops in Tsez; the same observation is made for Tsez in Maddieson, Rajabov, &



                                                  26
Sonnenschein (1996). Maddieson, Rajabov, & Sonnenschein (1996) also measure formant
transition of vowels before pharyngealized uvulars: the only consistent result they report is
lowering of F3 of the preceding vowel (e.g., in /ʀaqʕ/ vs. /ʀaq/).

       The most comprehensive study of effects of pharyngealization in NWC is provided by
Colarusso (1988), who offers spectrograms but no statistical data on the effects. Colarusso
concludes that acoustic effects are “complex,” but he identifies the most noticeable ones: noisy
energy in 400–600 Hz range (and sometimes around 1,100 Hz and 2,000–2,400 Hz) (Colarusso,
1988, p. 222).

        To my knowledge, no quantified measurements of Ubykh pharyngealization have been
presented in the literature, and Colarusso (1988) does not measure formants of vowels following
pharyngealized segments. I analyzed a recording of two Ubykh words, /qʕ’aːp’a/ ‘handful’ and
/q’aːp’a/ ‘hand’, each uttered eight times in isolation, in apparent random order, by Tevfik Esenç
(recorded by Georges Dumézil and available at LaCiTO). The following parameters of the stop
following /qʕ’/ and /q’/ were measured: F0, F1, F2, F3 (all at 20%, 50%, and 80% of vowel
duration).

         Pharyngealization significantly affects F1 and F3 values, but not F2 values. Contrary to
the effects of pharyngealization observed in Chechen, Ubykh pharyngealization lowers F1
significantly at 20%, 50%, and 80% of vowel duration (at 20%, t = 9.1, df = 10.2, p < 0.0001).
There is no significant effect of pharyngealization on F2 at any of the three points measured (at
20%, t = 0.76, df = 8.2, p = 0.47). Pharyngealization significantly lowers F3 at all three points (at
20%, t = 7.9, df = 9.1, p < 0.0001). Figure 15.10 illustrates the effects of pharyngealization on
the first three formants with standard errors.

        Furthermore, vowel durations are significantly shorter if the vowel is pharyngealized (t =
4.7, df = 13.9, p < 0.001; Welch Two Sample t-test). The data, however, show no effect of
pharyngealization on F0, either at 20%, 50%, or 80% of vowel duration (at 50%, t = –1.67, df =
13, p = 0.12 with Welch two-sample t-test).7

         The effects of pharyngealization on the following vowel in Ubykh differ in some aspects
from the effects summarized for Nakh-Dagestanian languages above. However, the Ubykh data
are limited to one speaker and a single minimal pair. F3 does indeed lower substantially after
pharyngealized stops, in accordance with results from other languages. F1, however, lowers
substantially too, which differs from most other studies. This discrepancy reveals that effects of
pharyngealization can be quite different across languages and that detailed descriptions of
acoustic effects of pharyngealization as well as their articulatory and perceptual properties are
still lacking.




7
 It is possible that experiments with higher power would yield different results with respect to effect of
pharyngealization on F0.



                                                          27
Figure 10: Differences in vowel formants with standard errors for pharyngealized vs. plain low
vowel in Ubykh (obtained with lm() function and effects package, Fox, 2003).




3 Phonotactics

Consonant clusters, especially Kartvelian clusters, are probably the best-studied aspect of
Caucasian phonotactics. Articulatory and perceptual research on Georgian clusters provides
crucial information for the discussion on the role of production versus perception in phonology.
This section reviews the discussion on Georgian clusters and their relevance for phonological
theory as well as points to aspects of Kartvelian phonotactics that have remained largely
unnoticed in the current phonological literature.

3.1 Georgian clusters

Traditional grammarians identify two kinds of clusters in Kartvelian: harmonic and non-
harmonic (Axvlediani, 1949, among others, via Butskhrikidze, 2002). Harmonic clusters are
clusters of two obstruents, a dorsal and a non-dorsal that agree in laryngeal features. Non-
harmonic are all other clusters that do not belong to the harmonic group, but are permitted
phonotactically in Georgian. Table 15.9 shows harmonic clusters in Georgian (from
Butskhrikidze, 2002; Chitoran, 1998).




                                               28
       C+stop                C+fricative
voicedvoicelessejectivevoicedvoicelessejective
  bɡ    phkh     p’k’    bɣ     phx      p’χ’
         h h                     h
  dɡ    tk       t’k’    dɣ     tx       t’χ’
 dzɡ    ʦhkh     ʦ’k’ dzɣ      ʦhx       ʦ’χ’
 ʤɡ     ʧhkh     ʧ’k’ ʤɣ        ʧhx      ʧ’χ’
           h
         sk              zɣ     sx
         ʃkh             ʒɣ      ʃx

Table 9: Georgian harmonic clusters
Note: From Butskhrikidze (2002, p. 103).



        Harmonic clusters are distinguished from non-harmonic ones phonetically and
phonologically. Harmonic clusters can appear in stem-final position, never feature optional r-
insertion, are copied in reduplication (e.g., /tsxel-tsxeli/ for /red-tsxeli/ ‘hot’), and according to
speakers’ judgments, syllabify into the same syllable, e.g., /si.t’q’va/ ‘word’ (Butskhrikidze,
2002, pp. 103–105). This latter claim is, however, disputed. Syllabification data are based
exclusively on speakers’ judgments, and Chitoran (1998) reports inconsistent judgments in her
experiment.

         The phonetic status of harmonic clusters has been subject to even more debate. Harmonic
clusters are either analyzed as complex, doubly articulated segments or as sequences of simple
segments. Some analyses divide harmonic clusters even further: corono-dorsal clusters are
analyzed as complex segments, whereas labio-dorsal clusters can be either clusters or complex
segments with lexicalized distribution between the two (discussion in Chitoran, 1998). The basis
for this distinction is the observation that corono-dorsal clusters can surface in three-stop
clusters, e.g., /t’k’bili/ ‘sweet’, whereas labio-dorsals cannot.

         Acoustic studies of Georgian harmonic clusters yield little support for the complex-
segment analysis. Chitoran (1998) analyzed harmonic clusters and corresponding sequences of
two obstruents across word boundary. Her study found no significant difference in proportion of
released versus unreleased stops between harmonic clusters and “harmonic” sequences of stops
across word boundary: the first and second element in clusters are equally frequently released in
harmonic clusters compared to sequences of stops across word boundary. Harmonic clusters
almost always have two releases, contrary to what has been described impressionistically in
earlier literature. Similar results are obtained in McCoy (1999), who reports that all clusters in
her experiment feature two releases and that in voiced harmonic clusters a presence of an
automatic transitional vowel was detected (e.g., [dəas] for /das/). Moreover, measurements of
duration do not support the complex-segment analysis either. Duration of harmonic clusters is
not shorter compared to sequences of stops across word boundary (Chitoran, 1998; also McCoy,
1999).

       Georgian clusters have also been analyzed articulatorily (Chitoran, Goldstein, & Byrd,
2002; Zhghent’i, 1956). Cross-linguistically, clusters have been found to have significantly less
overlap word-initially, and significantly less overlap in front-to-back clusters compared to back-


                                                   29
to-front clusters. It has been argued that these patterns stem from perceptual recoverability;
word-initially, clusters lack formant transitions into closure. It is reasonable to assume that the
minimal overlap results from the need for more perceptual cues in a position where such cues are
reduced. A similar explanation has been proposed for the smaller degree of overlap in back-to-
front clusters. If back-to-front clusters overlap to a high degree, the release of the first segment in
the cluster occurs when the second stop is still unreleased, which again reduces perceptual cues
(as summarized in Chitoran, Goldstein, & Byrd, 2002).

        Georgian clusters that feature a division into two groups (harmonic or recessive and non-
harmonic or non-recessive) are perfect for testing these hypotheses. Chitoran, Goldstein, & Byrd
(2002) conducted an articulatory experiment involving two speakers of Georgian, with EMA
measurements of cluster articulations. Their study confirms the hypotheses outlined above: there
is significantly less overlap in word-initial clusters and significantly less overlap in back-to-front
(non-harmonic) clusters. Chitoran, Goldstein, & Byrd (2002) also suggest that it is precisely the
high degree of overlap in front-to-back clusters that is responsible for the requirement of
harmonic clusters to agree in laryngeal features. In other words, a high degree of overlap means
that laryngeal features of the first stop are realized at the onset of the second stop, i.e., the
members of the cluster share laryngeal features.

        The hypothesis outlined above—that perceptual factors influence the degree of gestural
overlap—leads to questions concerning the interplay of synchronic and diachronic effects on
phonetics and phonology. While it is true that greater overlap in front-to-back clusters could be
caused by perceptual mechanisms, this is not the only possible cause. Chitoran, Goldstein, &
Byrd (2002) mention that the origin of harmonic clusters are likely velarized obstruents that later
segmented into a sequence of two stops (as proposed in Gamkrelidze & Ivanov, 2010). However,
they do not discuss the implications of this historical development. If Gamkrelidze’s
reconstruction holds, then we expect harmonic clusters that go back to single segments to have
greater overlap by virtue of their origin, not necessarily because of perceptual recoverability.

         That perception cannot be the only cause of differences in degree of overlap is argued in
subsequent articulatory work on Georgian clusters. Chitoran and Goldstein (2006) measured
overlap in clusters of a stop and a sonorant. There too, back-to-front clusters such as [kl] and [rb]
“are less overlapped” than front-to-back clusters (reported in Chitoran & Cohn, 2009), although
perceptual recoverability plays a much smaller role when sonorants are members of clusters. In
fact, as Chitoran and Cohn (2009, p. 35) point out, “liquids do not rely on their releases in order
to be correctly perceived.” The authors then suggest that “perceptual recoverability is not directly
encoded in the in the phonology.” Phonetic differences in the degree of overlap may have
emerged for perceptual reasons, but were then phonologized over time, generalized, and encoded
as part of phonological grammar. The problem of different degrees of overlap in consonant
clusters across different types and positions, as well as the question of their causes and origins
thus requires further investigation.

        Harmonic and non-harmonic clusters of two obstruents represent just a subset of licit
clusters. Kartvelian languages have consonant clusters with up to six consonants in word-initial
position. Perhaps the most famous example is the Georgian word /phrthskhvna/ ‘to peel’.




                                                  30
        Large clusters are governed by different phonotactic rules across Kartvelian languages
(Harris, 1991c; Öztürk & Pöchtrager, 2011, among others). Common to all restrictions is that
longer clusters obligatorily include sonorants. For example, Megrelian clusters of two obstruents
can only be preceded by an /r/ or an /n/ and followed by a /v/ (Harris, 1991c, based on Gudava &
Gamkrelidze, 1981).

        Kartvelian clusters thus pose a problem to the Sonority Sequencing Principle (SSP): if
sonorants precede segments with lower sonority such as voiceless stops, SSP is violated quite
severely (as in /phrthskhvna/). Some analyses of Kartvelian clusters argue that these sonorants
are syllabic and that harmonic clusters are doubly-articulated single segments (Butskhrikidze,
2002). Under this analysis then, the SSP would not be violated. For example, /p’rʧ’χ’ali/ would
be analyzed as [p’r̩.ʧ͡ ’χ’ali] or an initial sequence /bdɣvn-/ would be analyzed as [b͡dɣvna-] or
possibly [b͡dɣwna-] without SSP violations. There is, however, little external support for such a
hypothesis: harmonic clusters do not behave as complex segments according to phonetic
analyses, and syllabification arguments are based solely on speakers’ judgments which are
inconsistent (Chitoran, 1998). Phonetic analyses might reveal that sonorants undergo substantial
reductions in sonority in the cluster environment, which would mean that SSP would not be
violated. This is suggested by the realization of /r/, which is reported as devoiced before
voiceless obstruents (Butskhrikidze, 2013; Sturm, 2016; Zhghent’i, 1956). Further acoustic and
articulatory studies of phonetic realization of sonorants in clusters are much needed.

3.2 Svan clusters

Some aspects of cluster phonotactics differ across Kartvelian languages. Long clusters in
Georgian are restricted to word-initial position. This distribution is reversed in Svan: word-
initially, Svan allows only one two-member harmonic cluster (or a cluster that historically goes
back to a harmonic cluster) with an optional following [w], while no such restriction exists for
word-final position (Tuite, 1998a). Tuite (1998a; citing Zhghenti, 1949) illustrates long word-
final clusters in Svan: /axeqws/ you stole up on something’ or /xoswʒ/ ‘I ordered
somebody’.

        The restriction against word-initial clusters to the exclusion of word-final clusters is
likely part of active phonology in Svan and is reflected in loanword phonology and
morphophonological alternations. For example, initial clusters in loanwords undergo epenthesis
(/karavæt/ < Rus. krovat bed). The restriction against initial clusters is also revealed
morphophonologically, in metathesis and epenthesis: /x/ of the prefix /xw-/ is deleted and /w/ is
metathesized before a consonant-initial root, e.g., /xw-t’ix-e/  [t’wixe] ‘I return it’ (Tuite,
1998a). If metathesis is not available, initial clusters are repaired by epenthesis, e.g., /m-t’ix-e/
 [mət’xe].

        While longer clusters in Svan are not restricted to codas specifically, they are restricted to
word-final position, where they necessarily appear in the coda position. In other words, Svan
syllables allow many more complex codas than complex onsets. The concentration of clusters
word-initially vs. word-finally in Georgian and Svan leads to questions concerning phonetic
motivation in phonotactics. We also know that initial clusters are articulated with greater degree
of overlap compared to final clusters, which was confirmed by articulatory studies on Georgian.


                                                  31
To my knowledge, no articulatory studies of Svan clusters exist; experimental studies on the
topic would provide information on whether the universal distribution of the degree of overlap
holds true even for languages in which complex codas are more frequent than complex onsets.

3.3 Outside Kartvelian

Consonant clusters are much more restricted in Nakh-Dagestanian and Northwest Caucasian
languages as compared to Kartvelian. The maximal syllable structure in many languages is CVC.
Godoberi is among the languages with the most restricted syllable structure (Kodzasov, 1996;
Saidova, 2004): syllables can only be closed with a sonorant or the labial [b] (Kodzasov, 1996).
The tendency toward open syllables is also strong in Tsez (Alekseev & Radzhabov, 2004). While
clusters are more restricted in Nakh-Dagestanian and NWC, Catford (1977) notes that most
morpheme-initial clusters in Northwest Caucasian and intra-morphemic clusters in Nakh
languages observe the same restriction as in Kartvelian whereby only harmonic clusters are
possible, agreeing in laryngeal features, recessive, and consisting of a stop and a stop or fricative.
The division of clusters into harmonic and non-harmonic thus appears to be shared by all
Caucasian languages.

4 Processes

Caucasian phonological systems are not characterized by a great amount of active synchronic
phonological alternations. Some of the more common processes include vowel deletion in hiatus;
root-final vowel deletion before a grammatical morpheme (e.g., in Nakh-Dagestanian); vowel
deletion in open syllables; metathesis of /v/ and /r/ driven by the SSP (e.g., in Katvelian); voice,
place, or manner assimilation in clusters; dissimilation of two rhotics (e.g., in Georgian, Abkhaz,
Abaza); labialization and delabialization of obstruents before rounded vowels; pharyngeal
spreading; and vowel harmony (e.g., in Svan, Bezhta, Tsakhur).

Several processes that have the potential to affect phonological theory have gone unnoticed in
Caucasian linguistics. I present them here with an appeal for further investigation, as many of
these processes are poorly described.

4.1 Laz identical consonant deletion

The Khopa subdialect of Laz, spoken in Sharpi, has a rule of identical consonant deletion. In a
VCiVCi sequence, the first consonant is deleted in order to satisfy the OCP constraint: two
identical segments are not permissible within adjacent syllables. Deletion of the consonant
results in a hiatus that remains unresolved, e.g., /mkjapu-pe-k/  [mkjaupek], /op’ʦ’op-up-t/ 
[op’ʦ’oupt] or /bʤiraminonja/  [bʤiamionja] (Holisky, 1991, based on Kartozia, 1968). In the
Optimality Theoretic framework, this alternation is easy to account for: the OCP constraint that
penalizes two identical consonants in onsets of adjacent syllables is ranked above the Max
constraint. Despite theoretical predictability, such deletion, where a consonant is dropped before
an identical consonant in the following syllable, is not typologically frequent. 0004866621.

4.2 Megrelian nasalization



                                                 32
Harris (1991c) describes a rule in Megrelian whereby /ph/, /p’/, /b/, and /m/ turn into [n] before a
consonant across a morpheme boundary, e.g.[k’oʦ-ep-i] vs. [k’oʦ-en-k] and [k’oʦ-en-s].

(1) [+lab] -> [+cor,+nas] / _- [+cons].

This alternation is limited to morpheme boundaries: it constitutes a case of Non- Derived
Environment Blocking (NDEB; Kiparsky, 1993) where, as the name suggests, an alternation
only operates in derived environments and is blocked elsewhere. Moreover, the alternation is not
completely regular: it does not apply in all morphological environments (Harris, 1991c). This
alternation triggers both change in manner, from obstruents to nasals, as well as change in place
of articulation, from labial to coronal. At first sight, the alternation appears phonetically highly
unmotivated; nasalization in a non-nasal environment (before a voiceless stop) is not
phonetically easy to motivate. However, Megrelian syllable structure and cluster phonotactics
might motivate the rule internally. It is reasonable to assume that the change in manner is
motivated by the SSP: plateaus such as /-phkh#/ or /-phs#/ are repaired by increasing the sonority
of the first element. Note, however, that /phs/ is a licit cluster in Megrelian. The change in place
could be motivated by a restriction on Megrelian clusters, whereby the first element of a cluster
in which second element is an obstruent has to be either /r/ or /n/. Further descriptive and
experimental work is needed for more conclusive results.

4.3 Focus gemination

One of the more intriguing processes in Nakh-Dagestanian is focus gemination, reported for
Chechen and Ingush (Nichols, 1994, 2011). The process targets the last intervocalic consonant in
Chechen and first post-vocalic consonant of a word in Ingush when that word is in focus or
emphasized. The consonant undergoes gemination, e.g., Ingush /lʌqʌ/ ‘high’ versus /lʌqqʌ/
‘high.foc’ (Nichols, 2011). This process could also be analyzed as a C-reduplication of focused
words, but because another synchronic process, word-final-gemination, produces identical results
in Ingush (see 15.4.5), the analysis with gemination seems appropriate. In addition to
gemination, focused words receive a special intonational pattern with both vowels around the
geminated consonant receiving high pitch and emphasis. This intonation gives an acoustic
impression of the word under focus featuring two stressed syllables (Nichols, 2011).

      As Nichols points out, syntactic conditions of gemination are not always clear. For
Chechen, this process seems to be “frozen in the lexicon” (Nichols, 1994, p. 20), but no such
remarks are made for Ingush.

       A similar process is reported in some verbal stems in Abkhaz (Hewitt, 1979a), where it is
sporadic and analyzed as reduplication, e.g., /a-ħwa-ra/ ‘to say’ and /a-ħwħwa-ra/ ‘to cry’.
Gemination/reduplication in Abkhaz serves several functions: from adding intensive semantic
component to onomatopoeia (Hewitt, 1979a). Further studies of this typologically rare
phenomenon are needed.




                                                 33
4.4 Reduplication

Several reduplicative patterns emerge in Caucasian languages, ranging from C- or
CVreduplication to total reduplication (e.g., Butskhrikidze, 2002; Schulze, 1997b). A
typologically rare pattern is reported for Hinuq by Forker (2013c): reduplication morpheme is of
the structure CVC(V), but the initial consonant of the reduplicated stem is replaced by /m/ or /t’/,
e.g., [koɬe] versus [koɬe-moɬe], [ħali] versus [ħali-malica], [kottu] versus [k’ot-mottu], [roq’e] for
[roq’e-t’oq’e]. The semantics of this reduplication is ‘more emphatic or more extreme’ and can
target different parts of speech. This reduplication pattern is highly reminiscent of echo
formations or the so-called shm-reduplication, but the semantics of Hinuq reduplication differs
from the semantics of echo formations. Echo formations are “used to downplay or deride a
particular phrase” (Nevins & Vaux, 2003); Hinuq reduplication is used for emphasis. This
suggests that echo-formation types of reduplication which manipulate root-initial segments are
possible in the function other than that of downplaying.



4.5 Processes targeting word-final voiceless stops

The rest of this section focuses on two processes in Nakh-Dagestanian that target consonants in
word-final position: final gemination and final voicing. Both processes are typologically rare and
arguably unnatural: they target the unmarked segment and turn it into a marked segment in a
given environment. While final gemination might be phonetically motivated, final voicing is
truly unnatural: it operates against a universal phonetic tendency that devoices word-final voiced
obstruents (Beguš, 2019).

4.5.1 Final gemination

Nichols (2011) reports that consonants are geminated in word-final position in Ingush. Voiceless
obstruents alternate with existing voiceless geminates, whereas consonants without phonemic
geminate counterparts get phonetically geminated, e.g., [bʌtː] for /bʌt/ or [maːw] for /maw/.
Final gemination also targets stops and affricates (but not fricatives) in some, but not all, word-
final clusters: [fordː] for /ford/. The application of the rule is morphologically conditioned: it
applies in only a subset of morphological forms (Nichols, 2011).

Final gemination is typologically an unusual process. A survey of sound changes in Kümmel
(2007) found only one case of final gemination, which, moreover, targets only a coronal nasal.
Geminates are also articulatorily and perceptually dispreferred in wordfinal position. Long
consonants are in general articulatorily more difficult to produce, but even more so in word-final
position where segments have “reduced pulmonary pressure” (Iverson & Salmons, 2011, p.
1633). In addition, perceptual cues for closure duration are severely impoverished in word-final
position.

       While final gemination seems to operate against a universal phonetic tendency, it can also
be motivated by a process that lengthens final segments. Segments are cross- linguistically
phonetically longer in word-final position (Lindblom, 1968; Oller, 1973). Final gemination can


                                                 34
thus be analyzed as a phonetically motivated result of word-final phonetic lengthening. The
morphologically limited scope of this rule, however, suggests that final gemination did not arise
from a single sound change.

4.5.2 Final voicing

Word-final or coda voicing (/T/  [D] / _#) is one of the most thoroughly discussed
phonological processes. It is assumed to be a highly unnatural process which is either impossible
or unattested synchronically.

         The opposite process, final devoicing, has clear articulatory and perceptual motivations:
phonation is difficult to maintain during closure, and this difficulty is even greater word-finally,
where stops are produced “with reduced pulmonary pressure” (Blevins, 2004; Iverson &
Salmons, 2011, p. 1633). Moreover, cues for presence or absence of voicing are perceptually
impoverished in final position (Iverson & Salmons, 2011; Steriade, 1997). Passive phonetic
devoicing in word-final position is attested even in languages without phonological final
devoicing. Word-final devoicing thus fits the bill for a universal phonetic tendency (Beguš,
2019): it has a well-motivated phonetic explanation; there exists a phonetic tendency to devoice
final stops even in languages without phonological devoicing; and it is very common and well-
attested cross-linguistically.

       Kiparsky (2006) claims that final voicing is never attested as a productive synchronic
process, despite several diachronic scenarios that could lead to it (he identifies several such
scenarios). In fact, he goes a step further and claims that final voicing is not only unattested but
also impossible and that cognitive restrictions of synchronic grammar are responsible for this
typological gap.

         Because of these claims, final voicing has become a test case for the discussion of factors
that influence phonological typology. The absence of final voicing is used as evidence in favor of
the Analytic Bias approach that claims cognitive restrictions shape the typology; if diachronic
explanation (Channel Bias; Moreton, 2008) is unable to explain the systematic gap, it has to be
Universal Grammar that rules out final voicing. Blevins (2004) presents several cases of final
voicing, but Kiparsky (2006) argues that none of these apparent cases qualiy as synchronic final
voicingor, at least, that the described phenomena have competing alternative explanations.

        The most robust example of word-final voicing is found in Lezgian, where word-final
voicing targets final unaspirated stops and voices them, e.g., /rap/  [rab] needle’ (Fallon,
1998; Gajdarov, Giulmagomedov, Mejlanova, & Talibov, 2009; Haspelmath, 1993; Yu, 2004).
Haspelmath (1993) and Yu (2004, p. 77) report that Lezgian distinguishes four stop series
prevocalically (plain voiced, voiceless ejective, voiceless aspirated, and plain voiceless), which
in coda position get reduced to a three-way distinction: the plain voiceless series and voiced
series merge into a single voiced series. In other words, Lezgian features a synchronic
phonological alternation that targets an unmarked segment, word-final unaspirated voiceless
stop, and turns it into a marked segment, voiced stops. Final voicing is limited to monosyllabic
words.



                                                 35
        The phonetic study in Yu (2004), however, shows that underlying voiced and plain
voiceless series do not neutralize completely: there is a statistically significant difference
between the two series in word-final position. Voiced consonants that derive from underlying
plain voiceless stops have a significantly longer closure duration as well as a longer duration of
voicing into closure. If we wish to maintain that Lezgian voices final stops, we must, at the same
time, assume that these consonants receive (at least phonetic) lengthening as well. It is unclear
from a synchronic perspective why this should happen.

        The fact that the two series do not neutralize completely allows Kiparsky (2006) to
propose an alternative analysis. He assumes that the Lezgian synchronic phonological system has
four series of stops, but unlike Yu, he proposes that the fourth series consists of voiced
geminates. Thus, instead of coda voicing, he assumes that the process in Table 15.10 is in fact
onset degemination and devoicing (/Dː/  [T] / σ[_). Table 15.11 summarizes the two analyses.

       Kiparsky’s (2006) analysis, too, has its shortcomings. Like Yu, Kiparsky has to devise a
two-step process: devoicing and degemination of voiced geminates in onset position, and onset
devoicing is not a particularly common process in its own right. However, this derivation is by
no means impossible, and Kiparsky (2008) provides evidence from other languages including
Mordvin, Ewondo, and Lac Simon Algonquian (Iverson, 1983), demonstrating that initial
devoicing is a possible synchronic phonological process. As a sound change, such development
may be attested in Anatolian and in Selkup (Kümmel, 2007).

        In sum, although Lezgian provides an apparently compelling example of final voicing,
two major problems persist. First, the voicing process is limited to monosyllabic words. Second,
the plain voiceless and voiced series do not neutralize completely in coda position; a phonetic
difference between the two series is detectable. These problems pave the way for alternative
proposals that analyze the alternating series as underlyingly voiced and assume that the
synchronic phonological process in Lezgian is in fact onset devoicing rather than final voicing.
Additionally, lack of speaker data from nonce word tests makes it difficult to determine how
productive this process actually is. Further investigation of this typologically rare process is
needed. For instance, wug tests could provide information on productivity, and dialectal research
might reveal varieties that neutralize voiceless and voiced stops completely in word-final
position.



Place           #             VV
bilabial        rab           rapar          ‘needle’
dental          pad           patar          ‘side’
velar           mug           mukar          ‘nest’
uvular          raɢ           raqar          ‘sun’
dental          warz          warʦar         ‘moon’
post-alveolar   raʒ           raʧar          ‘grain’

Table 10: Final voicing in Lezgian



                                                36
Note: From Haspelmath (1993).




 Yu (2004) Kiparsky (2006)
Input Output Input Output
      V #           σ [ ]σ
  D D D        D    D D
  T’ T’ T’ T’      T’ T’
  Th Th Th Th      Th Th
  T T D       D:    T D:

Table 11: Different input analyses of Lezgian stops in Yu (2004) and Kiparsky (2006)

5 Conclusion and future directions

This chapter surveyed major topics of segmental phonetics, phonotactics, and phonological
alternations of Caucasian languages. Details on individual languages can be found in descriptive
chapters on language families and individual languages in this volume.

        The section on phonemic inventories focuses on a few main topics in each family:
laryngeal features, typologically rare segments or rare phonemic oppositions, and
pharyngealization. New experimental data from Georgian are presented and some phonetic
generalizations, such as gradual shortening of aspiration in the context before another aspirated
stop, are reported for the first time. The first section also features a new acoustic and statistical
analysis of already existing recordings of Ubykh. The section on phonotactics focuses on
consonant clusters and their role in the discussion on the role of perception versus production in
phonology. Finally, the last section on active phonological alternations reviews data from
Caucasian in light of discussion on naturalness and universals in phonology.

        Each section reveals that even the major topics in Caucasian phonetics and phonology are
understudied and point to those aspects that merit further research. It is surprising that languages
of the Caucasus have not received more attention in phonetic and phonological literature,
especially given their rich inventories of segments and a number of typologically unusual
processes.

         Several research projects could produce results that would be relevant for phonetic and
phonological theory. Pharyngeals and pharyngealization, velar lateral fricatives, ejective
fricatives, and doubly articulated bilabio-alveolar stops are some of the highly unusual segments
of Caucasian languages, yet detailed and systematic phonetic descriptions of these phenomena
are still lacking. Standards and technological availability of both acoustic and articulatory
research tools and methods have improved dramatically since last major studies of Caucasian
phonetics were undertaken; thus, the first next step in phonetic research of the Caucasus should
involve instrumental acoustic and articulatory descriptions of at least those dialects that feature
typologically unusual segments. Articulatory real-time MRI or ultrasound studies of pharyngeals,
epiglottals, pharyngealization, and epiglottization could offer insight into the phonetics of the



                                                  37
radical part of the vocal tract and answer questions such as the following: Is phonemic contrast
between pharyngeal and epiglottal place of articulation possible? What are acoustic correlates of
pharyngeal versus epiglottal place of articulation? Exactly how many different possible
articulations are there in the radical part of the vocal tract and what are their mechanisms, and
what (if any) are phonetic differences between consonantal and vocalic pharyngealization?
Articulatory studies of velar laterals, NWC series of sibilants, and ejective fricatives would
reveal where precisely in the vocal tract the point of constriction is made for these segments and
what are their acoustic correlates. The outstanding question of how we define a doubly
articulated stop versus a secondary articulation and, relatedly, are doubly articulated bilabio-
alveolar stops even possible should be explored on the case of NWC labialized alveolars: further,
articulatory and acoustic studies of these segments, especially with respect to timing difference
between two constrictions, are a desideratum.

        Other topics worthy of further investigation include correlation in different acoustic
parameters between stops with different laryngeal features (both intra- and inter-dialectally),
phonetic typology of ejectives, phonetic effects of ejectives on neighboring sounds, and causes
of aspiration dissimilation.

         In phonology, several experimental studies could have a bearing on theory construction.
An experimental study in the form of well-formedness judgments could reveal whether the
restriction of large clusters to word-initial versus word-final position in Georgian versus Svan is
part of active synchronic phonology in these two languages. Likewise, Lezgian final voicing has
been analyzed phonetically and phonologically in detail, but no experimental studies exist that
test synchronic productivity of this rule, and those would provide invaluable further insights into
naturalness in phonology. Similarly, thorough descriptive and experimental studies of other less
well-described unnatural or typologically unusual processes discussed in this chapter, such as
final gemination, focus gemination, Megrelian nasalization, or Laz identical consonant deletion,
would also yield further insights for theoretical questions in phonology.



Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Lena Borise, Marika Butskhrikidze, Ioana Chitoran, and Maria Polinsky for
their helpful discussion on aspects of Caucasian phonetics and phonology. Some experimental
results are reported for the first time in this chapter. The experiments were funded by the Mind
Brain Behavior initiative at Harvard University and the Abby and George O’Neill Research
Grant at Davis Center at Harvard University to the author, as well as the NSF grants BCS-
1144223 and BCS-1619857 to Maria Polinsky.


References




                                                38
Akhvlediani, G. (1949). Zogadi ponet’ik’is sapudzvlebi. [Foundations of general phonetics]. Tbil-
       isi: Tbilisis Sakhelmc’ipo Universit’et’is Gamomcemloba.
Alekseev, Mikhail E. (ed.). 1998. Jazyki mira: Kavkazkie jazyki. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo Academia.
Alekseev, M. E. and R. N. Radžabov. 2004. Tsez. In Michael Job (ed.), The North East Caucasian
       Languages. The indigenous languages of the Caucasus 3. Part 1. 115-168. Delmar, NY:
       Caravan Books.
Allen,W. S. 1956. Structure and system in the Abaza verbal complex. Transactions of the Philo-
       logical Society 55:127-176.
Allen, W. S. 1965. On one-vowel systems .Lingua 13: 111-124.
Anderson, G. D. S. 1997. Lak phonology. In Alan S. Kaye and Peter T. Daniels (eds.), Phonologies
       of Asia and Africa (Including the Caucasus). 973-997. Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns.
Authier, Gilles. 2009. Grammaire Kryz (langue caucasique d’Azerbaı̈djan, dialecte d’Alik). Paris:
       Peeters.
Bates, Douglas, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, and Steve Walker 2015. Fitting Linear Mixed-
       Effects Models Using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software 67(1): 1-48.
Beguš, Gašper. 2016. Post-Nasal Devoicing and a Probabilistic Model of Phonological Typology.
       Ms., Harvard University. (lingbuzz/003232)
Beguš, Gašper. 2017. Effects of ejective stops on preceding vowel duration. Journal of the Acous-
       tical Society of America 142(4): 2168-2184
Beguš, Gašper and Aleksei Nazarov. 2017. Lexicon against naturalness: Unnatural gradient
       phonotactic restrictions and their origins. Ms., Harvard University.
Bessell, Nicola J. 1992. Towards a phonetic and phonological typology of post-velar articulation.
       Ph.D. Thesis, University of British Columbia.
Blevins, Juliette. 2004. Evolutionary Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boersma, Paul and David Weenink. 2015. Praat: doing phonetics by computer [Computer pro-
       gram]. Version 5.4.06, retrieved 21 February 2015 from http://www.praat.org/.
Bokarev, E. A., K. V. Lomtatidze, Y. D. Dešeriev, G. B. Murkelinskij, M. A. Kumaxov, S. M.
       Xajdakov, and A. K. Šagirov (eds.). 1967. Jazyki narodov SSSR. Volume 4: Iberijsko-
       kavkazskie jazyki. Moskva: Akademija nauk SSSR.
Butskhrikidze, Marika. 2002. The Consonant Phonotactics of Georgian. Utrecht: LOT.
Butskhrikidze, Marika. 2013. /r/ drop in Colloquial Georgian. Ms.
Catford, J.C. 1972. Labialization in Caucasian languages, with special reference to Abkhaz. In A.
       Rigault and R. Charbonneau (eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of
       Phonetic Sciences. 679-682. The Hague.
Catford, J. C. 1977. Mountain of Tongues: The Languages of the Caucasus. Annual Review of
       Anthropology 6(1): 283-314.
Catford, J.C. 1983. Pharyngeal and laryngeal sounds in Caucasian languages. In D. M. Bless and J.
       H. Abbs (eds., Vocal Fold Physiology: Contemporary Research and Clinical Issues 344-350.
       San Diego, CA: College Hill Press.
Charachidze, Georges. 1981. Grammaire de la langue avar. Paris: Éditions Jean-Favard.



                                                1
Chen M. 1970. Vowel length variation as a function of the voicing of the consonant environment.
       Phonetica 22(3). 129-159.
Chitoran, Ioana. 1998. Georgian harmonic clusters: phonetic cues to phonological representation.
       Phonology 15: 121-141.
Chitoran, I., L. Goldstein, and D. Byrd. 2002. Gestural Overlap and Recoverability: Articulatory
       Evidence from Georgian. In C. Gussenhoven and N. Warner (eds.) Laboratory Phonology
       7. 419-447. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chitoran, I. and L. Goldstein. 2006. Testing the phonological status of perceptual recoverability:
       Articulatory evidence from Georgian. Poster presented at Laboratory Phonology 10, Paris,
       France, June-July 2006.
Chitoran, I. and A. C. Cohn. 2009. Complexity in phonetics and phonology: Gradience, categori-
       ality, and naturalness. In F. Pellegrino, E. Marsico, I. Chitoran, C. Coupé (eds.), Approaches
       to Phonological Complexity. 21-46. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chirikba, Viacheslav. A. (2003). Abkhaz. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Choi, Jonh D. 1991. An acoustic study of Kabardian vowels. Journal of the International Phonetic
       Association 21(1): 4-12.
Colarusso, John. 1988. The Northwest Caucasian Languages: A Phonological Survey. New York:
       Garland.
Davidson, Lisa. 2016. Variability in the implementation of voicing in American English obstruents.
       Journal of Phonetics 54: 35-50.
Durvasula, Karthik and Qian Luo. 2014. Voicing, aspiration, and vowel duration in Hindi. Pro-
       ceedings of Meetings on Acoustics 18(1): 060009.
Džejranišvili, E. F. 1959. Faringalizovanye glasnye v Tsakhursko-Rutul’skom i Udinskom jazykakh.
       Iberijsko-Kavkazkoe Jazykoznanie 11: 339-335.
Esling, John H. 1996. Pharyngeal Consonants and the Aryepiglottic Sphincter. Journal of the
       International Phonetic Association 26(2): 65-88.
Esling, John H. 1997. Pharyngeal approximants, fricatives, trills, and stops. Working Papers of the
       Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria 14. 1-12.
Esling, John H. 1999. The IPA categories “pharyngeal” and “epiglottal”: Laryngoscopic observa-
       tions of the pharyngeal articulations and larynx height. Language and Speech 42: 349-372.
Esling, John H. 2010. Phonetic notation. In William J. Hardcastle, John Laver, and Fiona E.
       Gibbon (eds.), The Handbook of Phonetic Sciences. Second Edition. 678-702. Oxford:
       Blackwell.
Fallon, Paul D. 1995. Synchronic and Diachronic Typology: The Case of Ejective Voicing. Pro-
       ceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society: General
       Session and Parasession on Historical Issues in Sociolinguistics/Social Issues in Historical
       Linguistics. 105-116.
Fenwick, Rohan S. H. 2011. A grammar of Ubykh. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Forker, Diana. A Grammar of Hinuq. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Fox, John. 2003. Effect Displays in R for Generalised Linear Models. Journal of Statistical
       Software 8(15): 1-27.

                                                 2
Gajdarov, R. I., A. G. Gjulmagomedov, U. A. Mejlanova, and B. B. Talibov. 2009. Sovremennyj
      lezginskij jazyk. Maxačkala: IJaLI DNC RAN.
Gamkrelidze Thomas V. and Vjaceslav V. Ivanov. 2010. Indo-European and the Indo-Europeans. A
      Reconstruction and Historical Analysis of a Proto-Language and Proto-Culture. Tr. Johanna
      Nichols. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Garrett, Andrew. 2015. Sound change. In Claire Bowern and Bethwyn Evans (eds.), The Routledge
      Handbook of Historical Linguistics. 227-248. London: Routledge.
Gaprindašvili, Šota G. 1966. Fonetika Darginskogo Jazyka. Tbilisi: Macniereba.
Gordon, Matthew, and Ayla Applebaum. 2006. Phonetic Structures of Turkish Kabardian. Journal
      of the International Phonetic Association 36(2): 159-86.
Gordon, Matthew, and Ayla Applebaum. 2013. A comparative phonetic study of the Circassian
      languages. Berkeley Linguistics Society: 3-17.
Gordon, Matthew, Paul Barthmaier, and Kathy Sands. 2002. A cross-linguistic acoustic study of
      fricatives. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 32: 141-174.
Grawunder, Sven, Adrian Simpson and Madzhid Khalilov. 2010. Phonetic characteristics of ejec-
      tives — samples from Caucasian languages. In Susanne Fuchs, Martine Toda, and Marzena
      Zygis, Turbulent Sounds. 209-244. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
Gudava, Togo and Tamaz Gamkrelidze. 1981. Tanxmovantk’omp’leksebi megrulshi [Consonant
      clusters in Mingrelian], Ak’ak’i Shanizhes [Festschrift]. 202-243.
Hargus, Sharon. 2007. Witsuwit’en Grammar: Phonetics, Phonology, Morphology. Vancouver:
      University of British Columbia Press.
Harris, Alice C. 1991. Mingrelian. In Alice C. Harris (ed.), Kartvelian Languages. The indigenous
      languages of the Caucasus 1. 313-349. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Haspelmath, Martin. 1993. Lezgian grammar. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hayes, Bruce. 2016. Varieties of Noisy Harmonic Grammar. Talk presented at Annual Meeting on
      Phonology on October 21, 2016, University of Southern California.
Heap, Lynn M. 1997. Acoustic analysis of pharyngeal approximants, fricatives, trills, and stops.
      Working Papers of the Linguistics Circle of the University of Victoria. 13-22.
Hewitt, B. G. 1979. Abkhaz. Lingua Descriptive Studies, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland
      Publishing Company.
Hewitt, George. 2004. Introduction to the Study of the Languages of the Caucasus. Munich:
      Lincom Europa.
Holisky, Dee Ann. 1991. Laz. In Alice C. Harris (ed.), Kartvelian Languages. The indigenous
      languages of the Caucasus 1. 395-472. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Hothorn, Torsten, Kurt Hornik, Mark A. van de Wiel, and Achim Zeileis. 2006. A Lego System
      for Conditional Inference. The American Statistician 60(3): 257-263.
Ibragimov, G. X. 1968. Fonetika Caxurskogo jazyka. Maxačkala: Dagestanskij filial akademii
      nauk SSSR.
Ibragimov, G. X. 1990. Caxurskij jazyk. Moscow: Nauka.
Imnadze, Nat’ela. 1981. Zanuri enis megruli dialek’tis bgerit’i sedgeniloba [The sound structure
      of the Megrelian dialect of the Zan language]. Tbilisi: Mecniereba.

                                               3
Iverson, Gregory. 1983. Voice alternations in Lac Simon Algonquian. Journal of Linguistics 19:
       161-164.
Iverson, Gregory K. and Joseph C. Salmons. 2011. Final Devoicing and Final Laryngeal Neu-
       tralization. In Marc van Oostendorp et al. (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Phonology:
       Suprasegmental and prosodic phonology. Volume 2. 1622-1643. Malden, MA: Wiley-
       Blackwell.
Jakobson, R., C. G. M. Fant, and M. Halle. 1951. Preliminaries to Speech Analysis. Cambridge,
       MA: The MIT Press.
Jatteau, Adèle and Michaela Hejná. 2016. Dissimilation can be gradient: Evidence from Aberyst-
       wyth English. Papers in Historical Phonology 1: 359-386.
Job, Michael (ed.). 2004. The North East Caucasian Languages. The indigenous languages of the
       Caucasus 3. Part 1. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Kartozia, Guram. 1968. Masalebi lazuri zep’irsit’q’vierebisatvis [Material for Laz folklore]. Kar-
       tuli lit’erat’uris sak’itxebi. 132-78. Tbilisi: SSSR MAG.
Kibrik, A. E. 1994. Archi. In Rieks Smeets (ed), The North East Caucasian languages. The
       indigenous languages of the Caucasus 4. Part 2. 297-365. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Kibrik, A. E. and S. V. Kodzasov. 1990. Sopostavitel’noe izuchenie dagestanskix jazykov: Imja.
       Fonetika. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo Moskovskogo universiteta.
Kibrik, A. E., S. V. Kodzasov, and I. P. Olovjanikova.1972. Fragmenty grammatiki Xinalugskogo
       jazyka. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo Moskovskogo universiteta.
Kibrik, A. E., and J. G. Testelets. 2004. Bezhta. In Michael Job (ed.), The North East Caucasian
       Languages. The indigenous languages of the Caucasus 3. Part 1. 217-295. Delmar, NY:
       Caravan Books.
Kingston, John. 2005. The phonetics of Athabaskan tonogenesis. In Sharon Hargus and Keren
       Rice (eds.), Athabaskan Prosody 137-184. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Kingston, John and Johanna Nichols. 1987. Pharyngealization in Chechen: Its Implications for
       Phonetics and Phonology. Ms. Earlier version presented at 112th meeting of the ASA in
       Anaheim, CA, Dec. 1986.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1993. Blocking in non-derived environments. In S. Hargus and E. Kaisse (eds.),
       Studies in lexical phonology. 277-313. San Diego: Academic Press.
Kiparsky, Paul. 2006. Amphichronic linguistics vs.Evolutionary Phonology. Theoretical Linguis-
       tics 32: 217-236.
Kiparsky, Paul. 2008. Universals constrain change, change results in typological generalizations.
       In Jeff Good, (ed.), Linguistic universals and language change. Oxford: OUP.
Kodzasov, Sandro V. 1977. Fonetika Archinskogo Jazyka. In A.E. Kibrik, S.V. Kodzasov, I.P.
       Olovjannikova, and D.S. Samedov (eds.), Opyt strukturnogo opisanija Archinskogo jazyka.
       Vol. 1, 185-352. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo Moskovskogo Universiteta.
Kodzasov, Sandro V. 1987. Pharyngeal features in the Daghestan languages. Proceedings of the
       XIth International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. 2nd Volume. 142-144. Academy of
       Sciences of the Estonian SSR, Tallinn, 1987.



                                                4
Kodzasov, Sandro V. 1996. Phonological preliminaries. In Alexandr E. Kibrik Sergej G. Tat-
      evosov, and Alexander Eulenberg, Godoberi. 1-6. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Komen, Erwin R. 2007. Chechen vowel inventory. In Pepijn Hendriks, Frank Landsbergen, Mika
      Poss, and Jenneke van der Wal (eds.), Leiden (Working) Papers in Linguistics 4(1): 1-28.
Kuipers, Aert H. 1960. Phoneme and morpheme in Kabardian (Eastern Adyghe). The Hague:
      Mouton.
Kümmel, Martin. 2007. Konsonantenwandel. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Kuznetsova, Alexandra, Per Bruun Brockhoff, and Rune Haubo Bojesen Christensen. 2016. lmerTest:
      Tests in Linear Mixed Effects Models. R package version 2.0-33.
Lacroix, René. 2009. Description du dialecte laze d’Arhavi (caucasique du sud, Turquie) - Gram-
      maire et textes. Doctoral dissertation, Sciences du langage, Lyon 2.
Ladefoged, Peter and Ian Maddieson. 1996. The Sounds of World’s Languages. Oxford: Black-
      well.
Lampp, Claire and Heidi Reklis. 2004. Effects of coda voicing and aspiration on Hindi vowels.
      The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 115(5): 2540-2540.
Laufer, Asher, and Iovanna D. Condax. 1979a. The epiglottis as an articulator. Journal of the
      International Phonetic Association 9(2): 50-56.
Laufer, Asher, and Iovanna D. Condax. 1979b. The epiglottis as an articulator. UCLA Working
      Papers in phonetics 45: 60-83.
Leben, William R. 1973. Suprasegmental Phonology, Doctoral dissertation, MIT.
Lindblom, B. 1968. Temporal organization of syllable production. Dept. for Speech, Music and
      Hearing Quarterly Progress and Status Report 9(2-3): 1-5.
Lisker, Leigh. 1957. Closure duration and the intervocalic voiced-voiceless distinction in English.
      Language 33(1): 42-49.
Luce, Paul, and Jan Charles-Luce. 1985. Contextual effects on vowel duration, closure duration,
      and the consonant/vowel ratio in speech production. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
      America 78(6): 1949-1957.
Maddieson, Ian. 1997. Phonetic Universals. In William J.Hardcastle and John Laver (eds.) The
      Handbook of Phonetic Sciences. 619-639. Cambridge: Blackwell.
Maddieson, Ian. 1983. The analysis of complex phonetic elements in Bura and the syllable. Studies
      in African Linguistics 15: 285-310.
Maddieson, Ian. 1984. Patterns of Sounds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maddieson, Ian and Jack Gandour. 1976. Vowel length before aspirated consonants. UCLA work-
      ing papers in phonetics 31: 46-52.
Maddieson, Ian, Ramazan Rajabov, and Aaron Sonnenschein. 1996. The main features of Tsez
      phonetics. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 93: 94-110.
Magometov A. A. 1970. Agul’skij jazyk: Issledovanie i texty. Tbilisi: Mecniereba.
McCarthy, John J. 1986. OCP Effects: Gemination and antigemination. Linguistic Inquiry 17:207-
      263.
McDonough, Joyce, and Peter Ladefoged. 1993. Navajo stops. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics
      84: 151-164.

                                               5
Melikishvili, Irine, Nana Gamkrelidze, Ivane Lezhava, Luiza Lortkipanidze, Ketevan Margiani,
        and Isabella Kobalava. 2011. glot’alizebuli fonemebi (eiekt’ivebi) kartvelur enebshi. [Glot-
        talized phonemes (ejectives) in Kartvelian languages]. Enatmetsnierebis sak’itkhebi [Issues
        of Linguistics]. International Volume of Articles devoted to Professor Jemshid Giunashvili.
        183-202. Tbilisi: Tbilisi University Press.
Merlingen, Weriand. 1977. Artikulation Und Phonematik Des H: Mit Einem Anh. über Phone-
        matik. Wien: VWGÖ Verb. D. Wissenschaftl. Gesellschaften Österreichs.
Mikailov, K. Š., 1967. Arčinskij jazyk. Maxačkala.
Moisik, Scott. 2013. The Epilarynx in Speech. Ph.D. thesis, University of Victoria.
Moran, Steven, Daniel McCloy, and Richard Wright (eds.) 2014. PHOIBLE Online. Leipzig:
        Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. (Available online at http://phoible.org,
        Accessed on 2017-03-31.)
Moreton, Elliott. 2008. Analytic bias and phonological typology. Phonology 25(1): 83-127.
Nevins, Andrew and Bert Vaux. 2003. Metalinguistic shmetalinguistic: The phonology of shm-
        reduplication. Proceedings of Chicago Linguistic Society 39. 702-721.
Nichols, Johanna. 1994. Chechen. In Rieks Smeets (ed), The North East Caucasian languages.
        The indigenous languages of the Caucasus 4. Part 2. 1-78. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Nichols, Johanna. 1997. Chechen Phonology. In Alan S. Kaye and Peter T. Daniels (eds.),
        Phonologies of Asia and Africa (Including the Caucasus). 941-972. Winona Lake, IN:
        Eisenbrauns.
Nichols, Johanna. 2000. The Historical Geography of Pharyngeals and Laterals in the Caucasus.
        Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society: Special Session
        on Caucasian, Dravidian, and Turkic Linguistics. 1-13.
Nichols, Johanna. 2011. Ingush Grammar. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Nichols, Johanna and Arbi Vagapov. 2004. Chechen-English and English-Chechen Dictionary.
        New York: Routledge.
Nooteboom, S. G. and G. J. N. Doodeman. 1980. Production and perception of vowel length in
        spoken sentences. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 67(1): 276-287.
Ohala, John J. 1993. The phonetics of sound change. In Charles Jones (ed.), Historical linguistics:
        Problems and perspectives. 237-278. London: Longman.
Ohala, Manjari and Ohala, Johh J. 1992. Phonetics universals and Hindi segment duration. J.
        J. Ohala, T. Nearey, B. Derwing, M. Hodge, and G. Wiebe (eds.), Proceedings, International
        Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Banff, 12-16 Oct 1992. 831-834. Edmonton:
        University of Alberta.
Oller, D. Kimbrough. 1973. The effect of position in utterance on speech segment duration in
        English. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 54(5): 1235-1247.
Öztürk, Balkız and Markus A. Pöchtrager (eds.). 2011. Pazar Laz. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Prince, Alan and Paul Smolensky. 1993. Optimality Theory: Constraint interaction in generative
        grammar. Tech. Rep. 2, Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science.
Prince, Alan, and Paul Smolensky. 2004. Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in Generative
        Grammar. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

                                                 6
R Core Team. 2016. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
       Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/.
Riebold, John. 2013. Vowel Analyzer. Praat script, available at [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/
       jmriebold/Praat-Tools/master/Vowel-Analyzer.praat].
Robert F. Port. 1985. Linguistic timing factors in combination. The Journal of the Acoustical
       Society of America 69(1):262-274.
Robins, R. H. and Natalie Waterson (1952). Notes on the phonetics of the Georgian word. Bulletin
       of the School of Oriental and African Studies 14, 52-72.
Saidova. 2004. Ghodoberi. In Michael Job (ed.), The North East Caucasian Languages. The
       indigenous languages of the Caucasus 3. Part 1. 69-114. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Schulze, Wolfgang. 1997. Tsakhur. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Shosted, Ryan K. and Vakhtang Chikovani. 2006. Standard Georgian. Journal of the International
       Phonetic Association 36(2): 255-264.
Smeets, Rieks. 1984. Studies in East Circassian Phonology and Morphology. Leiden: Hakuchi.
Smeets, Rieks (ed.). 1994. The North East Caucasian Languages. The indigenous languages of
       the Caucasus 3. Part 2. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Solé, Maria-J. 2011. Articulatory adjustments in initial voiced stops in Spanish, French and En-
       glish. In Wai S. Lee and Yun Y. Zee (eds.), Proceedings of the 17th international congress
       of phonetic sciences (ICPhS XVII): August 17-21, 2011. 1878-1881. Hong Kong: City
       University of Hong Kong.
Steriade, Donca. 1997. Phonetics in phonology: the case of laryngeal neutralization. Ms., UCLA.
Sturm, Julia. 2016. Sonorants in Georgian Consonant Clusters. Poster presented at South Cau-
       casian Chalk Circle at the University of Chicago Center, Paris. September 22, 2016.
Svantesson, Jan-Olof and Anastasia Karlsson. 2012. Preaspiration in Modern and Old Mongolian.
       Suomalais-ugrilaisen seuran toimituksia 264: 453-464.
Sylak, John. 2011. Pharyngealization in Chechen is gutturalization. In Chundra Cathcart, Shinae
       Kang, and Clare S. Sandy (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley
       Linguistics Society: Special Session on Languages of the Caucasus. 81-95.
Sylak-Glassman, John. 2014. Deriving natural classes: The phonology and typology of post-velar
       consonants. Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Šaumyan, R. 1941. Grammatičeskij očerk Agul’skogo jazyka. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo akademii nauk
       SSSR.
Talibov, B. B. 2004. Tsakhur. In Michael Job (ed.), The North East Caucasian Languages. The
       indigenous languages of the Caucasus 3. Part 1. 347-419. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Tuite, Kevin. 1997. Svan. Munich: Lincom Europa.
van den Berg, Helma. 2005. The East Caucasian language family. Lingua 115: 147-190.
Vicenik, Chad. 2010. An acoustic study of Georgian stop consonants. Journal of the International
       Phonetic Association 40(1): 59-92.
Warner, Natasha. 1996. Acoustic characteristics of ejectives in Ingush. In Timothy H. Bunnell
       and William Idsardi (eds.), Proceedings ICSLP: Fourth International Conference on Spoken
       Language. Vol. 3. 1525-1528.

                                                7
Wood, Sidney A. J. 1994. A Spectrographic Analysis of Vowel Allophones in Kabardian. Lund
      University Dept. of Linguistics Working Papers 42: 241-250.
Wysocki, Tamra. 2004. Acoustic analysis of Georgian stop consonants and stop clusters. Ph.D.
      dissertation, University of Chicago.
Yu, Alan C. L. 2004. Explaining final obstruent voicing in Lezgian: Phonetics and history. Lan-
      guage 80: 73-97.
Zhgent’i, Sergi. 1949. svanuri enis ponet’ik’is dziritadi sak’itxebi. Tbilisi: Mecniereba.
Zhgent’i, Sergi. 1956. K’art’uli enis p’onetika [Phonetics of Georgian language]. Tbilisi: Stalinis
      saxelobis T’bilisis saxelmcip’o universitetis gamomc’emloba.




                                                8
