<LINK "but-r12">
      "but-r13">




                   <TARGET "but" DOCINFO




                   AUTHOR "Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven"




                   TITLE "Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?"




                   SUBJECT "AVT, Volume 18 (2001)"




                   KEYWORDS ""




                   SIZE HEIGHT "220"




                   WIDTH "150"




                   VOFFSET "4">




                                                                                        Georgian harmonic clusters
                                                                                        as complex segments?
                                                                                        A perceptual experiment

                                                                                        Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven
                                                                                        ULCL-HIL Leiden




                                                                             1.   Introduction

                                                                             Harmonic clusters in Georgian consist of two obstruents, the ﬁrst being a coronal
                                                                             or a labial and the second being a dorsal. The obstruents share the voicing charac-
                                                                             teristics. There are two types of harmonic clusters, referred to as type A and type B.
                                                                             Type A refers to the combinations of [−dorsal] stops, aﬀricates and fricatives with
                                                                             [+dorsal] stops /g k k’/ and type B refers to the combinations of [−dorsal] stops,
                                                                             aﬀricates and fricatives with [+dorsal] fricatives /γ x χ’/.1 In some studies (Marr
                                                                             1925; Machavariani 1965), the combinations of fricatives /s s¦/ with dorsal obstruents
                                                                             are also treated as harmonic clusters:


                                                                                  (1)
                                                                                        Type A (C + stop)                              Type B (C + fricative)

                                                                                        [+voi]        [−voi]       [glot]              [+voi]        [−voi]     [+glot]

                                                                                        bg            pk           p’k’                bγ            px         p’χ’
                                                                                        dg            tk           t’k’                dγ            tx         t’χ’
                                                                                        jg            ck           c’k’                jγ            cx         c’χ’
                                                                                        ¦J g          c¦ k         c¦ ’k’              ¦J γ          c¦ x       c¦ ’χ’
                                                                                        zg            sk                               zγ            sx
                                                                                        z¦ g          s¦k                              z¦ γ          s¦x



                                                                             While investigating the special behaviour of Georgian harmonic clusters, several
                                                                             phonological arguments have been proposed to support their analysis as complex

                                                                                        Linguistics in the Netherlands 2001, 27–40. issn 0929–7332
                                                                                        © 2001 John Benjamins Publishing Company
<LINK "but-r2">
      "but-r9">
      "but-r6">
      "but-r16">
      "but-r18">




                   28   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven


                        segments. Some of them are considered below:
                        –   Harmonic clusters always syllabify together intervocalically, while other
                            obstruent clusters are never tautosyllabic, e.g. sit’cc’va ‘word’ [si.t’χ
                                                                                                    χ’va], cecxli
                            ‘ﬁre’ [ce.cxli] (Axvlediani 1949; Žgenti 1956).
                        –   Studies on the phonological processes involving consonant clusters revealed
                            that in case one consonant of a harmonic cluster changes, then the other
                            member changes as well, i.e., the processes shown in (2) are not attested
                            (Dzidzishvili 1966). Rather, one harmonic cluster changes into another
                            harmonic cluster, e.g. the alternation dg ~ tk: c’ardgra ~ c’artkra, etc.2

                            (2) *dg   tg               *tk      dk
                                      dk                        tg
                        –   Consonant complexes, other than harmonic clusters, are characterized by
                            optional /r/-insertion (Vogt 1958; Chikobava 1971; Deprez 1988).
                        –   Harmonic clusters never occur across morpheme boundaries. Harmonic
                            groups always belong to one morpheme, more speciﬁcally to the lexical
                            morpheme, which is called the stem.
                        –   Harmonic groups are the only obstruent sequences to appear in stem-ﬁnal
                            position (Vogt 1961; Deprez 1988).
                        –   In reduplicated forms, harmonic clusters retain their complexity, e.g. čkar-
                            čkara ‘quickly’; cxel-cxeli ‘hot’. Usually other types of obstruent sequences do
                            not participate in the reduplication process. Exceptions to this generalisation
                            are clusters of the /s/+C type, e.g. sc’or-sc’ori ‘right’, or svel-sveli ‘wet’.
                        –   Harmonic clusters are present in all Kartvelian languages (Svan, Megrelian and
                            Laz). There are many examples of correspondences of harmonic clusters in
                            Kartvelian languages, where the unity of the cluster is retained, e.g.
                            (3) Georgian      Megrelian       Laz            Gloss
                                    χ’l-
                                mat’χ              χ’or-
                                              mont’χ          mont’k’or      ‘wool’
                        In addition to phonological evidence, phonetic claims about simultaneity of closure
                        and release in harmonic clusters advocated by Žgenti (1965) and Aronson (1982)
                        led Deprez (1988) to the conclusion that harmonic clusters should be treated as
                        complex segments, represented as consisting of one root node as shown in (4):3
<LINK "but-r7">
      "but-r5">




                                                         Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?      29


                     (4)                                        /dg /

                                                                ROOT

                                                         lar            supralar

                                                        voice             place

                                                                coronal            dorsal

                  In line with Deprez’ analysis, Chitoran (1998) argues that if harmonic clusters are
                  complex segments, their articulatory gestures should overlap in time. As a result,
                  the release burst of the ﬁrst member of the cluster is suppressed by the occlusion
                  phase of the second member of the pair, so that only the release burst of the second
                  stop should come to the surface. Also, due to the (partial) temporal overlap of the
                  two stops in the harmonic cluster, the duration of the complex segment should be
                  shorter than that of the corresponding (heterosyllabic) sequence of consonants.
                  Unexpectedly, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in frequency of occurrence of
                  release bursts of the ﬁrst and second stops in the two types of clusters; in fact, bursts
                  were realised in more than 90 per cent of the cases, regardless of the type of cluster.
                  Secondly, the duration of the harmonic clusters was not shorter than that of the
                  corresponding C#C sequences; moreover, if there were signiﬁcant duration
                  diﬀerences, they were in the unexpected direction.
                       It should be pointed out that just counting the presence or absence of release
                  bursts is a very crude measure. We found that C1 bursts in the complex segment
                  were always present but had shorter durations and/or weaker intensities than their
                  counterparts in heterosyllabic sequences (Butskhrikidze 1998). This ‘incomplete
                  suppression’ of the C1 burst is hard to reconcile with the notion of gestural overlap,
                  but does argue for a diﬀerent status of harmonic groups as opposed to C+C
                  sequences. Also, the phonological environments in which the harmonic clusters and
                  their corresponding C+C sequences were examined, were not held constant in
                  Chitoran (1998). Therefore, the issue is as yet unsettled. The present paper is yet
                  another attempt to ascertain the phonological status of harmonic clusters as
                  complex segments.


                  Alternative approach
                  We tested the phonological hypothesis of harmonic clusters as complex segments
                  by looking at perceptual cues of native speakers of Georgian. The goal of our
                  experiment was to show whether harmonic clusters have perceptual cues diﬀerent
30   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven


     from other types of consonant sequences, but similar to simplex segments. The task
     of the experiment was the detection of a CVC target embedded in three diﬀerent
     types of non-word contexts: harmonic cluster (CV.CcV…), unrelated sequence
     (CVC.CV…), and single consonant (CV.CV….). The dot between V and C
     represents a phonetic syllable boundary. Two dependent variables were used to
     evaluate the experimental results, viz. detection rate (hit rate in %) and detection
     latency (reaction time in ms).
          If harmonic clusters are indeed complex segments, it should be diﬃcult to
     detect a CVC target embedded within a CV.CcV… context. This is because the ﬁnal
     C in the target string occurs in the onset of the next syllable and is (arguably) part
     of a single phonological segment (i.e., a harmonic cluster). Consequently, in terms
     of the two dependent variables, hit rates should be poor while reaction times (for
     correct decisions) should be high.
          Detection of the CVC target should be easy (high hit rates and fast latencies) if
     the ﬁnal C of the target is in the coda position of the test string, i.e., if the stimulus
     string has the structure CVC.C…. This situation should arise when the target is
     embedded in an unrelated consonant string context (CVC.C…).
          An intermediate degree of diﬃculty is predicted for the detection of the CVC
     target in a stimulus string where the ﬁnal C of the target appears as a single conso-
     nant in the onset of the next syllable. The detection is relatively diﬃcult because the
     listener has to resyllabify the ﬁnal C, but less diﬃcult than in the case of a harmonic
     cluster, as no decomposition of the cluster is required.
          For instance, the target k’ab, should be maximally easy to detect in the stimulus
     string k’ab.ra.na (ﬁnal b is in coda position), most diﬃcult to detect in k’a.bga.na
     (ﬁnal b is part of a complex cluster in the onset of the following syllable), and
     intermediate in k’a.ba.na (ﬁnal b is a single C in the next onset).


     2.   Method

     2.1 Stimuli
     Targets were always sequences of the CVC type embedded in diﬀerent phonetic
     contexts. Thirty-two sets (corresponding to the number of harmonic clusters, cf.
     (1)) were designed, each containing six non-words.4 Three non-words in each set
     were target bearing, as follows:
     i. one containing a harmonic cluster (harmonic Cc),
     ii. one containing the consonant string (unrelated CC), the ﬁrst segment of which
          was identical with the beginning of the harmonic cluster,
     iii. one containing just the ﬁrst segment of the harmonic cluster (single C).
<LINK "but-r3">




                                                         Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?     31


                  The other three non-words in the set did not contain the target. For instance, in the
                  case of the target tab the set of six non-words was ta.bga.mi – tab.ra.mi – ta.ba.mi –
                  ta.ra.mi – da.ra.mi – ča.ra.mi. The full set of targets plus non-words is included in
                  Appendix 1.
                       In all, 192 non-words (32 sets × 6 non-words) were recorded on Digital Audio
                  Tape (DAT) by a female native speaker of Standard Georgian (the ﬁrst author of the
                  present paper) in a sound-proofed recording booth, using a Sennheiser MKH416
                  unidirectional condenser microphone. The recordings were then transferred to
                  computer disk, downsampled to 16 kHz, edited out by means of a high-resolution
                  waveform editor (Praat software, Boersma and Weenink 1996) and stored on disk.


                  2.2 Listeners
                  A total of 24 native Georgian listeners (15 female and 9 male) participated in the
                  experiment. Subjects’ ages ranged from 18 to 40. None of the subjects reported any
                  speech or hearing impairment. All subjects took part on a voluntary basis and
                  received no remuneration for their service.


                  2.3 Procedure
                  Subjects participated in the experiment in individual sessions. During the experi-
                  ment the listener was seated in a quiet (but not sound-treated) room, with no other
                  persons present. Subjects were instructed, interactively and in writing, to monitor
                  the non-words that would be presented to them, and to decide for each non-word,
                  as fast as they comfortably could while avoiding errors, whether it did or did not
                  contain a pre-speciﬁed CVC sequence. If the stimulus contained the target se-
                  quence, the subject was to press a green key on the keyboard of a notebook
                  computer with his right hand; if the non-word did not contain the target sequence,
                  the subject was to press a red key with his left hand.5
                       The subject ﬁrst heard a target (CVC sequence), followed by a 500-ms pause,
                  which in turn was followed by a non-word. A 2000-ms timeout interval followed
                  the stimulus. If the subject responded before 2000 ms had elapsed, the presentation
                  of the next target was initiated 100 ms after the issuing of the response. If the no key
                  was pressed, the next target was presented immediately after the 2000-ms time out.
                       The 192 target-non-word combinations were presented without any break,
                  preceded by eight practice sequences. A diﬀerent random order of presentation was
                  used for each listener. Stimuli were converted from digital to analog on a notebook
                  computer and presented to the listeners over good quality headphones. Stimulus
                  presentation and response collection were fully automated, using E-prime soft-
                  ware.6
<LINK "but-r6">
      "but-r16">




                   32   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven


                        3.   Results

                        In total 24 (subjects) × 192 (stimuli) = 4,608 responses were collected. Only
                        responses to target-bearing stimuli were statistically analysed, reducing the nominal
                        number of responses to 2,304. Hit rate and mean latencies (for hits only) were
                        computed and subjected to oneway analyses of variance (ANOVA) with consonant
                        type (harmonic Cc, unrelated CC, single C) as a ﬁxed eﬀect. Post hoc t-tests for
                        contrasts between pairs of consonant types were run if the overall eﬀect was
                        signiﬁcant. We will ﬁrst present the results for the dependent variable ‘hit rate’, and
                        then proceed with the ‘latency’ data. Finally, the data will be analysed a second time,
                        after selecting a speciﬁc, phonologically (distributionally) motivated, subset with
                        coronal stops and aﬀricates only.


                        3.1 Hit rate
                        Table 1 presents means and standard deviations for the dependent variable ‘hit rate’
                        broken down by the three types of consonant sequences.

                        Table 1.Mean hit rate (%) and standard deviation broken down by type of stimulus
                        sequence
                        Type of stimulus sequence                        Mean            SD         N

                        Unrelated (CC)                                   86              35         754
                        Single (C)                                       78              41         748
                        Harmonic cluster (Cc)                            80              40         748



                             Table 1 shows that the CVC target was correctly detected in stimuli where the
                        target was an integral syllable (unrelated CC, i.e. the easiest condition) in 86 percent
                        of the cases. The hit rate is substantially poorer (80%) in the harmonic cluster (Cc)
                        context, which is as predicted. However, the hit rate in the single consonant (C)
                        context, which we predicted to assume an intermediate position along the diﬃculty
                        scale, was poorer still (78%). The overall eﬀect is signiﬁcant, F(2,2247) = 6.8
                        (p = .001). The post hoc tests reveal that unrelated CC diﬀers from the other two
                        types, which do not diﬀer from one another.
                             Several studies have claimed a diﬀerence within harmonic groups on distrib-
                        utional grounds: coronal + dorsal versus labial + dorsal (Vogt 1958; Chikobava
                        1971; Deprez 1988). Coronal + dorsal harmonic groups may be part of three-
                        member clusters while labial + dorsal harmonics may not. Secondly, coronal +
                        dorsal harmonic groups participate in long consonant sequences while the labial +
                                     Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?    33


dorsal type does not. On the basis of these distributional criteria, Deprez (1988)
proposed that all coronal + dorsal harmonic groups should be treated as complex
segments, whilst the labial + dorsal type should be analysed as either true (CC)
clusters or as complex (Cc) segments, based on some lexical distinction.
    Since all our stimuli are non-words, there is no way of knowing which labial +
dorsal Cc clusters should be analysed as true CC clusters. Therefore we reran the
analysis after selecting only responses to stimuli that contained the coronal-dorsal
type (for which the predictions are clear cut). To be on the safe side, we also
excluded the harmonic types that began with a continuant; these seem to pattern
with the labial + dorsal type. As a result of this data selection, only the types
contained in rows 2, 3 and 4 in (1) were kept in the analysis. This left us with 18
harmonic clusters (instead of 32) and 54 stimuli. Table 2 presents the breakdown of
results.

Table 2.Mean hit rate (%) and standard deviation broken down by type of stimulus
sequence. Only cluster types with coronal stops and aﬀricates were selected
Type of stimulus sequence)                          Mean         SD         N

Unrelated (CC)                                      86           35         446
Single (C)                                          74           44         442
Harmonic cluster (Cc)                               75           34         443



     The results are qualitatively the same as in Table 1, but the scores for the
harmonic clusters (Cc) and those of the single consonants have dropped a few
points, so that they diﬀer more from the unrelated C+C sequences. Consequently,
the overall eﬀect is more strongly signiﬁcant, F(2,1328) = 10.7 (p < .001). CC diﬀers
from both Cc and C, which do not diﬀer from each other.
     We conclude that separating out the coronal obstruent cases does not substan-
tially change the eﬀects. Therefore, there seems no ﬁrm experimental support for
the claim that complex segment status only applies to coronal obstruent clusters.


3.2 Reaction time
Table 3 presents mean detection time (in milliseconds) for hits only, broken down
by type of cluster. Detection time was deﬁned as the time interval between the onset
of the stimulus sequence and the moment the listener pressed the response key.
     The results indicate that the target was detected somewhat faster in the single
C condition than in the other two conditions, which do not seem to diﬀer from
each other. However, the eﬀect is a trend at best, as the ANOVA just fails to reach
signiﬁcance, F(2,1829) = 2.7, p = 0.067 (ins.).
34   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven


     Table 3.Mean and standard deviation of target detection time (ms) for hits only,
     measured from the stimulus onset, broken down by type of stimulus sequence
     Type of stimulus sequence                              Mean        SD       N

     Unrelated (CC)                                         1041        354      645
     Single (C)                                             1007        335      587
     Harmonic cluster (Cc)                                  1052        362      600



          Of course, the listener can only detect the target once the third segment in the
     stimulus sequence has become available. Since there may well be a diﬀerence in
     temporal structure between the three types of stimuli, we redeﬁned the detection
     time as starting from the earliest moment in the acoustic signal of the stimulus that
     fully contained the CVC sequence speciﬁed by the target. That is to say, the reaction
     time was measured from the oﬀset of the ﬁrst (or only) consonant in the crucial
     sequence. The results for the corrected detection times are presented in Table 4.

     Table 4.Mean and standard deviation of target detection time (ms) for hits only,
     measured from the oﬀset of C1 in stimulus, broken down by type of stimulus sequence
     Type of stimulus sequence                             Mean         SD      N

     Unrelated (CC)                                        894          389     645
     Single (C)                                            844          372     587
     Harmonic cluster (Cc)                                 892          407     600



          The results are qualitatively the same as before, but the diﬀerence between the
     relatively fast detection time for the single C condition and the remaining two has
     increased to about 50 ms, and reaches signiﬁcance, F(2,1829) = 3.2, p = 0.042. Single
     C diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the other conditions, which do not diﬀer from each
     other (Scheﬀé test).
          On the basis of Table 4 then, we conclude that the harmonic clusters pattern
     with the unrelated CC sequences. This patterning is diﬀerent from that found in the
     results for hit rate (Tables 1 and 2).


     3.3 Summary of results
     Table 5 summarizes the results of the experiment in terms of relative degree of ease
     with which the CVC target was detected in the stimuli, broken down by the three
     types of stimulus sequence. In Table 5 ‘+’ stands for ‘relatively easy detection’,
     whilst ‘−’ represents ‘relatively diﬃcult detection’. Of course, easy detection
                                      Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?     35


corresponds with a high percentage of correct detections, but with low detection
times.

Table 5.Relative ease ‘+’ versus diﬃculty ‘−’ for hit rate and detection time, broken
down by stimulus type
Stimulus sequence                 Unrelated CC      Harmonic Cc         Single C
Dependent

Hit rate (%)                      +                 −                   −
Detection time (ms)               −                 −                   +



     The summary in Table 5 shows quite clearly that the harmonic Cc clusters
behave like single consonants in terms of hit rate, but as a sequence of two unrelated
consonants when it comes to detection time. We interpret this patterning as an
indication that harmonic clusters are neither true consonant sequences nor simplex
consonants. They have separate, intermediate, status in the phonology of Georgian.
     Also, Table 5 indicates that detection of a CVC sequence was always diﬃcult in
a harmonic cluster context. Probably, this very patterns shows that harmonic
clusters are indeed complex segments, perceived indeed as a unit by Georgian native
listeners.


4. Conclusion and discussion

In the introduction we presented rather simple and straightforward predictions
regarding the detectability of a word-initial CVC target that was embedded in three
types of stimulus contexts, viz. the single C condition (CV.CV…), the harmonic
cluster condition (CV.CcV…), and the unrelated sequence condition
(CVC.CV…).
     We predicted that ease of detection would show up simultaneously in high
detection rates (hit rates) and fast detection times (for hits). Moreover, we predict-
ed that the target CVC would be most diﬃcult to detect if the ﬁnal consonant were
the ﬁrst part of a harmonic cluster in the onset of the second syllable in the stimulus
string. The rationale behind this prediction was that the listener would have to
break up a highly cohesive phonological unit, i.e. a complex segment, in order to
match the target CVC with the stimulus string, and make the match in spite of a
diﬀerence in syllable boundary.
     Although high hit rates usually go together with fast detection time, this result
did not obtain throughout our experiment. Yet, in the crucial condition, i.e. the
complex segment condition, we did ﬁnd the predicted correlation between poor hit
<LINK "but-r18">
      "but-r10">
      "but-r15">
      "but-r17">




                   36   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven


                        rate and long detection time. Moreover, the harmonic clusters were consistently
                        found to be the most diﬃcult type in the experiment, whether the results are
                        expressed in terms of hit rate or in detection time. The reference conditions (CC
                        and C) were easier to detect than the harmonic clusters in terms of either hit rate
                        (unrelated CC) or detection time (single C). On the strength of this evidence we
                        argue that our perception experiment has substantiated the phonological status of
                        Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments. Apparently, a perceptual
                        technique such as target detection in nonsense strings may provide a useful
                        diagnostic in the determination of the phonological status of some sound unit,
                        when the study of speech production or acoustics yields undecided results.
                             Before any deﬁnitive conclusions, whether substantive or methodological, are
                        to be drawn from our experiment, however, the experimental technique should be
                        calibrated against a clear-cut set of contrasts between simplex versus complex
                        segments. After all, one might argue that if the Georgian complex segments were
                        truly single consonants in the mental representation of the listener, it is hard to
                        understand how our experimental subjects were at all able to split them up into
                        plosive plus velar obstruent parts. Although the task of matching the target string to
                        a complex segment was more diﬃcult, our subjects were still quite successful in
                        accomplishing their task. It would make sense, therefore, to run a similar experi-
                        ment in English, where the aﬀricates /J̌ č/ constitute clear and undisputed examples
                        of complex segments that should be analyzed as single units — relying on syn-
                        chronic distributional criteria, phonological processes, their behavior in speech
                        errors (aﬀricates are always interchanged with single consonants, Fromkin 1971) as
                        well as on their historical origin (Steriade 1989; van de Weijer 1996). As in Geor-
                        gian, the ‘components’ of the English complex segments also occur as single
                        consonants in the phonology of the language, so that the task of splitting the
                        complex segment and matching the ﬁrst component to a single stop, should be
                        doable. We expect that the English results will be highly comparable to our
                        Georgian data.


                        Notes

                        1. The Georgian fricative χ’ is alternatively transcribed as a glottalised uvular stop q’.
                        Impressionistically it combines properties of stop and fricative articulation; nevertheless it
                        functions as a fricative.
                        2. Given that it is highly unusual across languages to have members in a CC sequence —
                        even across a syllable boundary — to have opposed [voice] values, the argument presented
                        here is not compelling; the facts can be explained as straightforward voicing assimilation.
                        However, Georgian is diﬀerent from most languages in that it regularly allows heterogeneous
                        obstruent clusters diﬀering in the voicing feature (Žgenti 1956).
<LINK "but-r14">
<DEST "but-r11">
      "but-r4">
      "but-r1">
      "but-r2">
      "but-r3">
      "but-r4">
      "but-r5">
      "but-r6">
      "but-r7">
      "but-r8">
      "but-r9">
      "but-r10">
      "but-r11">
      "but-r12">
      "but-r13">
      "but-r14">
      "but-r15">
      "but-r16">




                                                             Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?          37


                   3. Harmonic clusters are considered as complex segments in numerous studies (Gamkrelidze
                   and Machavariani (1965), Deprez (1988), Bush (1997), Nepveu (1994).
                   4. Non-words were chosen for several reasons: to maintain sameness of the phonetic
                   environment of a target, and to avoid morphological or word frequency eﬀects.
                   5. In the Georgian educational system right-handedness is normative. Assuming that no
                   natural diﬀerences between right-handed and left-handed subjects exist in this population,
                   we decided not to instruct our subjects to use their preferred hand for positive responses.
                   6. The script for the experiment was written by Ing. Jos J.A. Pacilly of the Universiteit Leiden
                   Phonetics Laboratory.



                   References

                   Akhvlediani, G. (1949) Zogadi Ponetikis Sapudzvlebi. [Foundations of General Phonetics].
                        Tbilisis Saxelmcipo Universitetis Gamomcemloba, Tbilisi.
                   Aronson, H. I. (1982) Georgian: A Reading Grammar. Slavica, Columbus.
                   Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (1996) Praat, a System for doing Phonetics by Computer,
                        Verscon 3.4. Report 132. Institute of Phonetic Sciences of the University of Amsterdam.
                   Bush, R. (1997) Georgian Syllable Structure. MA thesis, UC Santa Cruz.
                   Butskhrikidze, M. (1998) Phonetic Evidence for the Georgian Harmonic Groups. Unpub-
                        lished paper, Holland Institute of Generative Linguistics, Leiden.
                   Chikobava A. S. (1971) Gruzinskij Jazyk. [The Georgian Language]. Ganatleba, Tbilisi.
                   Chitoran, I. (1998) ‘Georgian Harmonic Clusters: Phonetic Cues to Phonological Re-
                        presentation’. Phonology 15, 121–141.
                   Depréz, V. (1988) ‘Georgian Complex Segments’. NELS 18, 109–23.
                   Dzidzishvili, M. (1966) ‘Tanxmovanta Kompleksisa da Ponetikuri Procesis Urtiert-
                        mimartebis Shesaxeb Kartulshi’. [‘The Relationship between the Consonant Complexes
                        and Phonetic Processes in Georgian’]. Iberiul-Kavkasiuri Enatmecniereba 15.
                   Fromkin, V.A. (1971) ‘The Non-linear Nature of Anomalous Utterances’. Language 47, 27–52.
                   Gamkrelidze T. and Machavariani, G. (1965) Sonantta Sistema da Ablauti Kartvelur Enebshi.
                        [Sonant System and Ablaut in Kartvelian Languages]. Tbilisis Saxelmcipo Universitetis
                        Gamomcemloba, Tbilisi.
                   Machavariani, M. (1965) Saerto Kartveluri Konsonanturi Sistema. [The Common-Kartvelian
                        Consonant System].Tbilisis Saxelmcipo Universitetis Gamomcemloba, Tbilisi.
                   Marr, N. (1925) Grammatika Drevneliteraturnogo Gruzunskogo Jazyka. [Grammar of Old
                        Literary Georgian]. Leningrad.
                   Nepveu, D. (1994) Georgian and Bella Coola: Headless Syllables and Syllabic Obstruents. MA
                        thesis, UC Santa Cruz.
                   Steriade, D. (1989) ‘Aﬀricates are Stops’. Paper presented at the MIT conference on Features.
                        MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
                   Vogt, H. (1958) ‘Structure Phonémique du Géorgien’. Norsk Tidsskrift for Sprogvidenskap 18,
                        5–90.
<DEST "but-r18">
      "but-r17">




                   38   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven


                        Vogt, H. (1961) Kartuli Enis Ponematuri Struktura. [Phonematic Structure of the Georgian
                            Language]. Tbilisis Saxelmcipo Universitetis Gamomcemloba, Tbilisi.
                        Weijer, J. van de (1996) Segmental Structure and Complex Segments. Niemeyer, Tübingen.
                        Žgenti, S. (1956) Kartuli Enis Ponetika. [Phonetics of the Georgian Language]. Tbilisis
                            Saxelmcipo Unversitetis Gamomcemloba, Tbilisi.
                        Žgenti, S. (1965) ‘Harmonische Komplexe von Konsonanten in der Khartvelischen Sprachen’.
                            Zeitschrift für Phonetik, Sprachwissenschaft und Kommunikationsforschung 18, 143–148.
                                      Georgian harmonic clusters as complex segments?   39


Appendix 1. The full set of targets (bold) and stimuli (non-words)

       1.   k’a.bga.na           1.   da.p’k’a.li                 1.   ta.bga.mi
       2.   k’ab.ra.na           2.   dap’.ra.li                  2.   tab.ra.mi
       3.   k’a.ba.na            3.   da.p’a.li                   3.   ta.ba.mi
       4.   ca.ba.na             4.   ba.ta.li                    4.   c¦ a.ra.mi
       5.   ma.sa.na             5.   k’a.da.li                   5.   da.ra.mi
       6.   ba.ra.na             6.   ra.da.li                    6.   ta.ra.mi
k’ab                      dap’                           tab
       1.   da.pki.nu            1.   ca.pxi.li                   1.   c¦ a.p’χ’a.ri
       2.   dap.ri.nu            2.   cap.ri.li                   2.   c¦ ap’.la.ri
       3.   da.pi.nu             3.   ca.pi.li                    3.   c¦ a.p’a.ri
       4.   ta.ri.nu             4.   pa.ni.li                    4.   da.p’a.li
       5.   da.k’i.nu            5.   da.vi.li                    5.   sa.ra.li
       6.   da.di.nu             6.   na.di.li                    6.   s¦a.ma.li
dap                       cap                            c¦ ap’
       1.   sa.dge.ri            1.   da.tko.mi                   1.   la.t’k’a.ni
       2.   sad.le.ri            2.   da.tro.mi                   2.   la.t’r.ni
       3.   sa.de.ri             3.   da.to.mi                    3.   la.t’a.ni
       4.   va.de.ri             4.   ga.so.mi                    4.   k’a.ja.ni
       5.   ga.me.ri             5.   k’a.do.mi                   5.   ga.da.ni
       6.   ja.ne.ri             6.   na.no.mi                    6.   sa.ca.ni
sad                       dat                            lat’
       1.   c’a.dg e.ri          1.   na.txi.li                   1.   za.t’χ’a.di
       2.   c’ad.le.ro           2.   nat.mi.li                   2.   zat’.ra.di
       3.   c’a.de.ri            3.   na.ti.li                    3.   za.t’a.di
       4.   va.ge.ri             4.   s¦a.di.ri                   4.   sa.ma.di
       5.   jàa.xe.ri            5.   k’a.ci.li                   5.   ja.sa.di
       6.   sa.te.ri             6.   ma.ni.li                    6.   k’a.sa.di
c’ad                      nat                            zat’
       1.   te.jgi.mo            1.   k’a.cki.li                  1.   de.c’k’e.vi
       2.   tej.di.mo            2.   k’ac.gi.li                  2.   dec.’de.vi
       3.   te.ji.mo             3.   k’a.ci.li                   3.   de.c’e.vi
       4.   ge.ri.mo             4.   da.ci.li                    4.   ge.xe.vi
       5.   se.di.mo             5.   sa.ri.li                    5.   ne.ge.vi
       6.   le.ki.mo             6.   z¦ a.di.li                  6.   te.ge.vi
tej                       k’ac                           dec’
</TARGET "but">




                  40   Marika Butskhrikidze and Vincent J. van Heuven



                               1.   c’a.jg u.li             1.   da.cxo.mi               1.   ve.c’χ’u.k’i
                               2.   c’aj.nu.li              2.   dac.k’o.mi              2.   vec.’gu.k’i
                               3.   c’a.ju.li               3.   da.co.mi                3.   ve.c’u.k’i
                               4.   da.su.li                4.   ga.do.mi                4.   ge.du.k’i
                               5.   da.c’u.li               5.   k’a.so.mi               5.   se.xu.ki
                               6.   da.zu.li                6.   la.do.mi                6.   ze.su.k’i

                       c’aj                         dac                         vec’
                               1.   ma.J¦gu.di              1.   se.c¦ .ko.na            1.   jo.c¦ ’k’o.li
                               2.   maJ¦.ru.di              2.   sec¦ .lo.na             2.   joc¦ ’.mo.li
                               3.   ma.J¦u.di               3.   se.c¦ .o.na             3.   jo.c¦ ’o.li
                               4.   ga.ru.di                4.   s¦.e.bo.na              4.   do.ro.li
                               5.   ja.χ’u.di               5.   ge.so.na                5.   p’o.so.li
                               6.   la.ku.di                6.   p’e.lo.na               6.   do.do.li
                       maJ¦J                        sec¦                        joc¦
                               1.   ma.J¦ga.li              1.   la.c¦ xa.di             1.   sa.c¦ ’χ’u.gi
                               2.   maJ¦.sa.li              2.   lac¦ .ma.di             2.   sac¦ ’.ru.gi
                               3.   ma.J¦a.li               3.   la.c¦ a.di              3.   sa.c¦ ’u.gi
                               4.   na.ga.li                4.   k’a.sa.di               4.   da.cu.gi
                               5.   ka.la.li                5.   pa.za.di                5.   va.nu.gi
                               6.   da.za.li                6.   na.p’a.di               6.   la.su.gi
                       maJ¦J                        lac¦                        sac¦ ’
                               1.   be.zgu.sa               1.   t’a.sko.ni              1.   ge.zgo.bi
                               2.   bez.ru.sa               2.   t’as.mo.ni              2.   gez.m o.bi
                               3.   be.zu.sa                3.   t’a.so.ni               3.   ge.zo.bi
                               4.   je.gu.sa                4.   da.xo.ni                4.   se.do.bi
                               5.   de.bu.sa                5.   ba.go.ni                5.   xe.bo.bi
                               6.   le.mus.a                6.   ta.lo.ni                6.   le.do.bi
                       bez                          t’as                        gez
                               1.   na.sxa.zi               1.   ge.z¦ gu.k’a            1.   be.s¦ko.mi
                               2.   nas.ma.zi               2.   gez¦ .du.k’a            2.   bes¦.lo.mi
                               3.   na.sa.zi                3.   ge.z¦ u.k’a             3.   be.s¦o.mi
                               4.   ma.la.zi                4.   de.xu.k’a               4.   ge.so.mi
                               5.   k’a.pa.zi               5.   me.su.k’a               5.   pe.do.mi
                               6.   ja.ra.zi                6.   c’e.zu.k’a              6.   de.go.mi
                       nas                          gez¦                        bes¦
                               1.   za.z¦ gu.lu             1.   χ’o.s¦xo.pi
                               2.   zaz¦ .ku.lu             2.   χ’os¦.mo.pi
                               3.   za.z¦ u.lu              3.   χ’o.s¦o.pi
                               4.   la.su.lu                4.   ro.k’o.pi
                               5.   χ’a.du.lu               5.   do.no.pi
                               6.   ta.xu.lu                6.   p’o.go.pi
                       zaz¦                         χ’os¦
