          The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon
                                          Donald Rayfield (London)


To many Georgians, the infiltration of English into their language, like the earlier (and not yet
extinct) infiltration of Russian calls for a fight against ‘barbarism’ – a term which we meet in a
number of articles on the subject and on lists of English words that are being transliterated and
used (or misused) in Georgian. But this battle is a familiar one, not just in linguistics, but in
politics. A language or a nation is assailed by hordes of outsiders, whether neighbouring
empires or plundering nomads, and tries to repel them. In fact, the outcome is usually a
compromise: just as the Byzantine empire was at first overwhelmed by Goths, but then
assimilated them as fellow-Christians and as border guards, so a language endures a wave of
alien influence and then digests and integrates it.
Before we look at more specific uses of anglicisms, their range, formation, altered meanings
etc., let us try to avoid outright condemnation of ‘barbarisms’, redundancy, contamination,
weakening etc. 400 years ago, Pierre Nicole, a colleague of Pascal’s saw the benefits of
enrichment by new vocabulary:1
      Il est donc avantageux, pour enrichir les langues vivantes, que des personnes judicieuses
      soient un peu hardies à se servir de nouveaux mots et de nouvelles phrases… surtout
      dans de grands ouvrages… pour éviter une trop grande ressemblance de manières de
      s’exprimer.
Turgenev in Smoke has his mouthpiece Potugin remark:2
      Take our language, for example. Peter the Great flooded it with thousands of foreign
      words – Dutch, French, German; these words expressed concepts which Russian people
      had to familiarise themselves with. Peter didn’t rack his brains or stand on ceremony: he
      filled our guts wholesale, by the bucket, by the barrel with these words. The initial result
      was something monstrous, but afterwards came the digestion process… The new ideas
      caught on and were absorbed; they lost their foreign shape, and our language found
      substitutes for them in its own resources.
If we look at the defences used against these ‘barbarisms’, we can see various strategies, some
successful, some absurd, some hopeless. At one extreme are the Slavonic languages of the
Austro-Hungarian empire: when the Czechs began their renaissance at the end of the eighteenth
century, they found that they lacked words – sometimes because old words were forgotten,
sometimes because new words had not been devised for new discoveries. Their solution was to
avoid borrowing from the ‘enemy’ language, German, and to devise their own from Slavonic
roots, so that we have in Czech klokan for kangaroo, souhlina for aluminium, plyn for gas etc.
The Croats took similar steps: they would not do as the Serbs did, calling a station a stancija,
but devised kolodvor. Croats, like Latvians, went even further, refusing to accept even foreign
surnames as originally written in the Latin alphabet, but transforming them by rendering them
phonetically. Such languages, whose norms were decided and enforced by rural schoolteachers
and nationalist academies, who were resisting imperial pressures, have been successful in their
self-sufficiency.


1
    Nicole 1858: 373–374 (‘Sur les langues’).
2
    Turgenev 1868: 40; translation D. R.

                                                    14
    Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

Other languages have not: the battle of the French government, despite its centralised control
of the education system and the prestige of the Académie française, has failed to stop television
and radio talking about le weekend, or teenagers saying cool, coolissime. Even with Britain out
of the EU, the English language remains powerful (as the common language, a neutral zone,
for Flemish and Francophone Belgians, as the real language of Ireland). All the French can
hang on to is an exceptional vocabulary for computer terms: ordinateur, fichier, logiciel, police
de caractères etc, but even so they are forced to use English web, blog, WiFi (gender
indeterminate), while couriel has failed to replace email, and télécharger is so ambiguous (up-
or down-load?) that we end up choosing between j’uploade and je mets en ligne. English bug
has given unbug and beuger to crash. Given this mess, Georgian’s internet diglossia seems quite
tolerable.
On a wider scale, Georgian must be considered one of the world’s languages that, like English
or Russian, borrows easily and widely and yet preserves its identity while quickly rejecting
what it fails to assimilate. Much depends, of course, in how the ‘barbarisms’ enter: by cultural
imitation, by forced conquest and foreign administration, by population mingling, and so on.
The history of Georgian shows half a dozen periods when there has been a massive onslaught
or infusion of alien terms, of which only a minority have established themselves in the language.
If we start with pre-history, there is no doubt that Kartvelians lived for some times
(Gamqrelidze’s assumption) in close proximity to Indo-Europeans in the Euphrates valley, so
numerous are the coincidences with basic Indo-European vocabulary and even morphology;
when Greek expatriates founded city-colonies on the Black Sea, a limited amount of Greek –
names of medicinal plants, ceramics etc – were adopted by Kartvelians. The return of monks,
together with Greek refugees, in the 11th century AD brought obscure Greek vocabulary used
by Petritsi and today no longer understood. Over several stages from the dawn of history to the
17th century, Iranian terms, especially of religion, administration, economic and military, later,
especially after Georgia’s association with Shirvan in the 12th century AD, of chivalry, epic
poetry, history, moral codes etc. exerted a powerful influence. Yet readers of Rustaveli or the
Rusudaniani now require a dictionary to understand many of these Iranian imports. From the
end of the 18th century to the end of the 20th, Russian became the dominant force. But it is
important to concede that Russia was more an imperial than a colonial power. The Russian
language could not permeate Georgia in the same way that English and French permeated
Africa. Its influence ran along specific channels: through military service into which so many
Georgians were conscripted, in the prison system, particularly the Soviet Gulag, which shaped
a large number of Georgian males and their language, and in the Communist hierarchy where,
to enjoy privileges and power, speakers of all Soviet languages had to regard Russian as a
primary means of communication.


1. The first wave of English importations
Public relations and human resources (PR and HR, პიარი, ეჩარი) spear-headed the formation
of western-style capitalist enterprise in the 1990s, and these two phenomena were seen as
aspects which Georgian entrepreneurs had to assimilate in order to set up western-friendly
businesses.
There was also an important internal factor promoting the influence of English. Georgia staked
its economic future on tourism (not just hiking, skiing, bird-watching, but medical, too), on a
permissive attitude to international business, on external investment. As a result, institutions
appear in which English is the main language of communication and instruction. Business


                                               15
                                 Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

courses on Human Resources use a great deal of English material. The Tbilisi Medical
Academy trains up to 300 doctors on six-year courses, with English the medium of instruction –
applicants who provide proof of proficiency in English will be prioritised. Help is offered with
the doctor's registration process in the UK. Similar prospects are offered at Kutaisi University
and the European University in Tbilisi – three anglophone academic and medical centres. The
Black Sea University also teaches many courses in English. These courses are popular with
non-Georgians, seeking an affordable way of gaining qualifications recognised in the west. The
result is, of course, that English, not Georgian, becomes the lingua franca of students and
teachers.
Previously, of course, there were Russian streams at Georgian universities, and all school pupils
had some subjects taught in Russian. The difference is that for many parents and students
Russian was the enemy’s language and the diglossia was a complex, often conflicting one,
whereas there is less antagonism to English or American influence, and the acquisition is
voluntary, sometimes enthusiastic.
Tourism has led to fluency in English in areas as remote and isolated as Svaneti and Tusheti,
where the second language for the younger generation may often be English, rather than
Russian: a guide for mountain climbers has to be able to give clear instructions to foreign
tourists.
Georgians, particular Tbilisi women, liked to make fun of Russian by creating Georgian
sentences where the words were Russian, but the morphology Georgian: sapozhnikma
gamiporta sapoghebi. English, however, is a prestigious aspiration and the language is treated
as a subject for mastery and for self-esteem, as well as one which gives opportunities for a
career overseas. Georgian macaronic jokes, so far, do not exploit English, so that we have
nothing like Mayakovsky’s macaronic Russo-Georgian poems to illustrate the diglossia with
English:3
     Да, я русский, რუსი გახლავარ […]
     и теперь вдали от вас
     ვისურვებდი ვყოფილიყავ
     თქვენთან ერთად
     Как с братом брат […]
     კვლავ მოგველხინა ღვინით და პურით,
     მაღლარი გვესვა ყანწით და ჭურით. […]
     Грузин я знал чуть не с пеленок,
     ღვინოსა ვყლაპავ как теленок
     ვეღარ დამათრობთ, იმედი ნუ გაქვთ!
     აბა დავლიოთ ახლა брудершафт.

From 1990 a century-old trickle of anglicisms (American and British) into Georgian became a
torrent with several subsidiary streams. One is the introduction of new products (from cell-
phones to pickup trucks), new customs (even morals), new commercial transactions etc., for
which no existing words (as distinct from descriptive paraphrases) have existed: more often
than not, an Anglo-Saxon word has been adopted to fill the gap. A second stream has been a
determination to rid certain spheres of Russianisms, notably the terms for automobile parts (a
field in which, during Soviet times, Russians and Armenians, rather than Georgians did the


3
    Mayakovsky 1933: [2].

                                               16
    Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

dirty work) by devising (or reviving) words of Georgian origin, or importing Anglo-Saxon
terms (a similar process has occurred in fields such as rugby football, played from 1959 to 1989
only against Slavonic teams, but now on a world basis). A third stream, after internet use
became widespread for personal communication and commerce, was the devising of a
terminology parallel to that of western internet users and commerce.
One exception to the trend of importing European vocabulary affects words categorised as
obscene or vulgar. Native Georgian words and phrases in the area of slang and obscenity have
also flourished: since 1990 words and phrases have appeared in print that had never been seen
in literary Georgian since the days of Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani; in this semi-taboo sphere, the
absence of foreign influence (if we discount the Hebrew of Georgian Jews) is remarkable.
The first example of crude importation, one which sharpened my interest in the new processes
affecting the evolution of modern Georgian, is the command იშოპინგეთ!, ‘Continue
shopping!’, found in online shops and market places. Like many other such words, it has
expanded its originally limited market-place use to general, non-internet communications, and
has begun to show derived and conjugated forms: წავედით საშოპინგოდ, ‘We went
shopping’, and yet, at the same time, we also see a typical variability in the transcription of the
original English, a variability that prevents such words entering the lexicon in a standard form:
შოპინგი or შოფინგი. The ejective consonants of შოპინგობს იშოპინგა უშოპინგია are
found more frequently than შოფინგობს იშოფინგა უშოფინგია, but despite the uncertainty
of spelling, all three series of the verb are now in use and the verb has passed the barrier of the
Georgian inflectional system. We should also note that the alien nature of the -ng- cluster in
non-Germanic languages has also not deterred the importation of English terms into Georgian.
More on these variations later.
This study is based on internet chat forums, commercial material, plays (notably by dramatists
who presented their work for translation and development at the Royal Court Theatre in London
in 2013), novels by Lasha Bughadze etc. It is odd that contemporary, even very young Georgian
dramatists and novelists still make their characters speak a Russified, not an Anglicised slang.
Authors who are middle-aged are uncomfortable with teenage vocabulary, but it is notable that
Lasha Bughadze’s ბოლო ზარი and ოქროს ხანი both have school-age or teenage
(anti-)heroes, whose slang is influenced by Russian, but not by English, even when they are
illegals working in Scarborough.
A rash preliminary conclusion would be that an alien flood, an indigestible input, has since
1990 struck the Georgian language, comparable to what happened with an Iranian influx in the
10th and Russian in the early 19th century. But, like earlier floods, a new process of absorption
and rejection is bound to take place, leaving only a percentage of digestible material to be
integrated with the body of the language. Much depends on the equilibrium of norms and
innovations reached between a strong and conservative elderly school-teaching establishment
and an active and anarchic young internet community. Arguably, another important factor is to
be found in the actual phonological structure of innovations: words such as რითრითი (retreat)
and დაიგუგლება (‘can be googled’) have a choice and distribution of consonants and vowels
which integrate easily with Georgian, not displaying their alien origin, whereas, say, the alien-
sounding აბეკაპებს (‘backs up’), with its unGeorgian syllabic structure, still has to compete
with the periphrastic Franco-Russian სარეზერვოდ ადუბლირებს.
The grammatical implications of imported anglicisms are also complicated: ვიშოპინგეთ (‘we
did some shopping’) is marked as a transitive verb with an ergative agent – although
intransitive, unless you count an adverbial complement, such as ბევრი, as an object. This


                                                17
                                  Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

process and similar contradictions seem to occur in other “ergative-inclined languages”, where
an imported intransitive verb acquires ergative marking, e.g. Basque nere kochek ez du
funtzionatzen ‘My car isn’t working’ (with transitive auxiliary du, and agent in ergative case),
instead of the theoretically correct *nere koche ez da funtzionatzen (with intransitive auxiliary
da, and subject in absolute case).


2. Inconsistencies and instabilities
Even the earliest anglicisms in Georgian, dating from 1980s, have not all achieved fixed form:
e.g. დაბლოკვა or დაბლოკება, დააბლოკავს or დააბლოკებს. Some maintain a dual
existence, failing to replace native terms: ჰედლაინი coexists with სათაური. New objects
have different versions of their name, depending on who manufactures and sells them. For
instance, ‘(chip) fryer’ > ფრი(ს აპარატი), ფრიტურნიცა or the conventional ზეთსახარში
ქვაბი.
Many anglicisms are hapax legomena, occurring once or twice, before disappearing, failing in
the struggle of the fittest to survive.
Nato Beridze, writing recently (with marked disapproval of the crudeness and barbarism of
unnecessary, in her view, innovation, especially in the field of computer studies), gives a long
list of anglicisms.4 But quite a few have over a decade or two proved their longevity, and some
have achieved currency outside a circle of computer programmers and hackers: დასერჩვა ‘to
search’, დამესიჯება ‘to message, SMS’, დაგუგლვა ‘to google’ (but დაგუგლება version
more common), გაშიარევა ‘to share’, დალაიქება ‘to like’, დალინკვა ‘to link’,
დაშატდოუნება ‘to shut down’, დატრენინგება ‘to train sb’, დაპოსტვა or დაფოსტვა ‘to
post’ – e.g. a message or picture on an Internet forum (the latter generates other phrases and
words, e.g. მპოსტავთა უმრავლესობა, გადაფოსტვა ‘to re-post’); სქროლვა ‘to scroll’
(note that სქროლება tends to mean ‘to ride a Scroll electric scooter). Some are still limited in
use: დასტალქვა ‘to stalk’, დასპამვა ‘to spam’, დაშეარება or დაშაირება ‘to share’.
Others, however, have gone viral: დასინვა ‘to see and take no action’ > ‘to gaslight sb’;
დაკლიკვა ‘to click’, from which sheer native genius has derived the term
არაკლიკებელური ‘not-clickable’, i.e. unattractive (of face, picture, proposition etc).


3. A closer look at a handful of particularly productive anglicisms
3.1 One outstanding viral, albeit unstable word comes from the English chat: ჩატ-ი, or ჩათ-ი
or ჩეტ-ი or ჩეთ-ი, -აობა (‘to chat’). Clearly, the ambiguity of ა/ე comes from deriving the
word imitating the vowel of the written or spoken (southern English) form, while the choice of
ტ/თ is an arbitrary or accidental one, even more vacillatory in the case of კ/ქ, for which I have
not been able to identify any consistent decisive factor. But the verb derived from
ჩატი/ჩათი/ჩეტი/ჩეთი has developed a whole nest of conjugated forms: ჩეთაობა > ჩეთაობს
> უჩეთავია> დაჩეთაობს with ე or ა for English open a; we also have ჩატაობა or ჩეთაობა
(rarely ჩეტაობა), and უჩეთავია or უჩატავია (consistent with the Russian-derived
ბლატაობა), rarely უჩათავია). Note that ჩეთაობდა and ჩეტაობდა have acceptable second
series forms: აქ ბევრმა იჩატავა, ‘a lot of people chatted here’.




4
    Beridze 2023.

                                               18
    Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

In this example the English import follows a pattern of many Russian imports: compare
ჩატაობს with ბლატაობს (იბლატავა, უბლატავია) ‘talking big and not delivering’, from
блатовать, and note the change in meaning from the original Russian (just as many English
importations also alter, restrict, or broaden their meaning: блатовать originally meant ‘talking
a person into a sexual or criminal act’). Also note addition of stem -ა, as in ბანაობა etc.,
typical of monosyllabic roots which form intransitive verbs in Georgian.
The meaning of ჩატაობა has spread from online to face-to-face chats, as well as AI robot
queries. So that we can have a series of actions: იმუშავა, იბანავა, იჩატავა, იბლატავა, ‘He
worked, washed, chatted and talked big’.


3.2 Entering Georgian perhaps after Russian in 1990s, the English ‘cringe’ (not particularly
prominent in English internet usage) has become widespread: დაქრინჯვა ‘to cringe’ – ‘to
experience inconvenience, discomfort, embarrassment’: შეიძლება დაიქრინჯოთ, როცა
ვიღაც ცდილობს გაგაცინოთ, მაგრამ თქვენ არ მოგწონთ მისი იუმორი ‘You might
cringe when someone tries to make you laugh, but you don’t like their humour’. მარტო შენ
არ ხარ ვინც საკუთარი წარსულის ჩანაწერებზე იქრინჯება ‘You’re not the only one
who cringes at their own past recordings’. ქრინჯი is very occasionally found as an adjective
(ქრინჯი ჩვევა ‘a cringeworthy habit’).
This anglicism was first introduced into Russian as an embarrassing, cringeworthy act (speech
etc.), apparently by gamers : кринж, кринжовый, кринжевать (кринжую), but took on a
wider meaning (‘disappointment, bad luck, e.g. breaking a leg after beauty treatment, as well
as embarrassment’). It may be an import by Russian pupils at English girls’ school, since cringe
and cringeworthy are very much middle-class and predominantly female terms to describe
witnessing embarrassing behaviour close to oneself. Georgian literary reaction to the verb is
somewhat snobbish: ვიქრინჯები – ამის ახსნა აქ ძალიან რთულია, მაგრამ არსებობს
ასეთი ზმნა უხერხულობის გადმოსაცემად ‘The definition of ვიქრინჯები is very
complex, but this verb exists to denote embarrassment’.5 ქრინჯება is now found in literary
translation, one example being: 6 დღემდე ვქრინჯავ თუ რამდენი რამ დავაიგნორე და
უბრალოდ თვალები ... რამდენ ... ყურადღება არ მივაქციე ‘To this day it makes me
cringe to admit, but there was a lot I blinked at and ignored then because I didn’t pay attention’.
It is interesting that the translator also uses (და-)იგნორება, an anglicism (if not from Russian
via Latin, German or English) which is a common borrowing in most European languages.
Russian игнорировать, unlike Georgian, has no perfective, but is found as early as the 1880s
in Dal’s dictionary and in early Chekhov: why did it take so long to get დავაიგნორე into
Georgian? What is puzzling is that ქრინჯება apparently has no causative (*აქრინჯებს). We
should also note choice of initial ქ over კ. As with other imported apparently intransitive verbs,
ქრინჯება may, or may not, be treated as a transitive verb requiring an ergative-marked subject
in the aorist: მენდიმ მაგრა იქრინჯა ალონსოს გოლში თავისი არაზუსტი პასით
‘Mendi was very embarrassed by a clumsy pass at Alonso’s goal’.7
‘Cringe’ is widespread in other languages: Bosnian Croat speakers, I am reliably informed, are
familiar with krindž, krindžati, krindžovati: in Sarajevo schools anglicisation has gone at least
as far as in Tbilisi, with not just skrolati ‘to scroll’, but terms like sus, ‘suspicious’.


5
  Tapnadze 2019.
6
  Mosiashvili 2021.
7
  Halamadrid 2022.

                                                19
                                          Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

3.3 The origin of დასინვა is not immediately obvious, but it is actually derived from English
‘seen’, the message on a smartphone when your message is delivered, but not yet read. დასინვა
has come to mean ‘to gaslight’, to ignore someone’s communications, and has succeeded in
completely concealing its alien origin: დასინული defines a message which (or someone who)
has been seen but left unanswered, and also a person who is being ignored or gaslighted/gaslit.
მიწერის შემთხვევაში კი დიდი შანსია იმისა, რომ დაგსინოთ, თუ თქვენც
"გაჩითული" [have 1000+ followers] არ ბრძანდებით ‘When you write, you have a big
chance of being gaslighted, unless you have a big following’.8 მაგრამ დაგვსინა ყველამ,
ახლა დაგსინოთ ევროპამ ‘But everyone has ignored us, now let Europe ignore you’.9
დასინვა has a past participle: ყველაზე მეტჯერ დასინული, ‘someone more ignored than
anyone else’. Few such verb neologisms have a complete conjugational set.


4. Problematic verbs
4.1 Some innovations seem unlikely to survive. They may be ugly (what Georgian wants to use
a verb beginning ჯვა-, even if it only means to judge?): ჯაჯვა (from English ‘judge’): სულ
ნუ მჯაჯავ: – შენთვის რომ კარგი მინდა, იმიტომ გჯაჯავ ‘Don’t judge me — I just want
the best for you, that’s why I judge you’.9
Other innovations seem needlessly complex: ამოაპრინტერებს, ამოუპრინტერებია refers
to printing from internet only, and is thus separate from დაბეჭდვა, which involves typing or
typesetting. What is interesting about ამოაპრინტერებს is its use of ამო- as a prefix and the
retention of an English nominal suffix -er: ამო- implies singling out a copy, while -ერებს
indicates that the borrower does not analyse the constituents of the word being borrowed.
There is a particular problem with ფრენდება (‘to befriend’): 1) some forms (e.g. დაფრენდა)
are homonyms with forms of the verb meaning ‘flying about’; 2) it lacks the essential opposite
‘to unfriend’. In general, the Georgian verbal prefix system lacks a specific prefix meaning ‘to
undo’, equivalent to an unambiguous dis-, un- in English.
დაფრენდება is not a secure import, because of its ambiguities when conjugated: როგორ
ლინკებს აშეარებთ? Facebook-ზე უამრავი ფრენდი ჰყავს. ჩვენ თვითონაც ვიღაცების
ფრენდები ვართ. ‘What kind of links do you share? You have countless friends on Facebook.
We ourselves are friends with some people’.9
The Russian version of ფრენდი has no such drawbacks, because Russian has the prefix рас- to
negate a verb, and thus френдить, with расфрендить/расфренживать, has a full
complement in word formation and conjugation. There is even an aphorism to illustrate this:

      Нельзя расфрендить незафренженное.

But Georgian has no negative for დაფრენდება, and, just like დალაიქება ‘to like’, the
negative is expressed by a supplementary verb, e.g. წაშალე, ‘erase, wipe off’.

4.2 The fourth and most popular innovation is from English ‘like’: ლაიქი, დალაიქება, which
now threatens even to oust მოწონება in young Georgian colloquial dialogue. ლაიქი for ‘like’
is unusually stable, since the form with an ejective კ, ლაიკი, is reserved for the breed of dog.

8
    Niny 2018.
9
    Facebook post, no longer available.

                                                      20
       Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

Here the choice (not always consistently made in imports from English) of the aspirate ქ is
dictated so as to avoid ambiguity.

დალაიქება has spread some distance away from being a mere Facebook button, e.g. the
advertisement: ვენდის კაფეს ვაშლის ტარტი მსუნაგებს დაულაიქებია ‘Gourmets
[seem to] like Wendy’s Café’s apple tart’.9 In chats დალაიქება is ubiquitous: ყველა
ერთმანეთის პოსტებსა და შეარებს ვუყურებთ, ვალაიქებთ როგორ ფოტოებს
პოსტავთ. რას ულაიქებთ ფრენდებს? ‘I follow all the mutual posts and shares, I like the
way you post photos. What do you like from your friends?’10
Russian has developed a special half-English, half-Slavonic prefix negative for лайкать/
лайкнуть: дизлайкать/дизлайкнуть, a resource which Georgian hasn’t yet developed, given
the absence of an unambiguous negating prefix.


5. The social and political function of Anglicised Georgian
      1. For professional groups (in business, entertainment etc) to demonstrate their
         international standing and modernity, but with no desire to be impenetrable to non-
         professionals;
      2. For teenagers, the opposite: to be safe from parental or adult interference, which is why
         sites appear on the net to tell teachers and parents what their charges are up to on their
         mobiles;
      3. For neighbours, former students, relatives, even adults in 20s and 30s.

Teenager vocabulary is meant to be impenetrable to teachers and parents (uncomprehending
adults can find the means to decipher their offsprings’ sociolect on allnews.ge; mshoblebi/
mascavleblebi.ge, etaloni.ge/geo).
Even so, much remains indecipherable. Some imports undergo major semantic changes: e.g.
სტალკვა has changed from meaning ‘stalk’, to ‘do close research (usually secretively’),
‘compile a dossier’ (on someone through social networks).
მიშეარებდა is now defined as ამბავს მიყვებოდა ან რაიმე ინფორმაციას მიზიარებდა,
მოქმედება დაუსრულებელია ‘told me a story or shared information with me’, imperfective.
დამიეფრუვებდე is defined as ნეტავ, დამიმტკიცებდე რაღაცას, რასაც ველოდები ‘I
would like something I’m expecting confirmed for me’.


6. Some common nouns
      ქრაში ‘a crush (on somebody)’
      ვაიბი ‘vibe, energy’
      ტროლი from which we derive დატროლვა – იტროლება, ტროლები ‘troll, trolling’
      ფიშინგი ონლაინ ბულინგი ‘fishing, online bullying’
      ჰეითერები ‘haters’.
Macaronic phrases mingling English and Georgian are as common as straight imports: e.g.
‘sensitive data’, სენსიტიური მონაცემები.


10
     Lominadze 2016.

                                                 21
                                 Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

Made-up English also flourishes, e.g. ეგობუსტა ‘has become more self-confident’ < ego-
booster;
არაკლიკებელური ‘unclickable, boring’ (person, site) – one might expect დაუკლიკებელი.
Note the use of the English morpheme -able as well as an English root.
და/ჩა-ფეისთება or და/ჩა-პეისტება, ‘to paste’, used in parallel with ჩასმა (but Georgian
has no equivalent of the ingenious Russian combination копипастить; instead ამოჭრა და
ჩასმა). There is one area where Georgian has failed to assimilate an alien term: no proper
Georgian form exists for ‘QR code’ (Russian кваркод): Georgians have QR, transliterated as
ქრ or ქანი რაე კოდი.


7. Synonyms that may not successfully compete with native words
დასეივება ‘to save’ equals შენახვა and has no real need to co-exist, whereas დასინვა ‘to
see but ignore’ is not the same as ნახვა and has its very specific meaning;
Similarly, გაშეარება ‘to share’ differs from გაზიარება: it means ‘to tell something
(private)’; likewise დააპდეიტება ‘to update’ is not the same as ‘to renew’ (განახლება), nor
does დასკიპვა to ‘skip’ (something) duplicate დატოვება;
Some anglicisms have limited specific semantics: computer only, but many are expanding
usage, especially in the imperative mood: დასერჩე! ‘Search!’, დაალაიქე! ‘Like!’,
დააშიარე ‘Share!’, etc., “increasing day by day”.11
Natia Davitishvili12 notes how the process of importation creates variants of the English in form
and meaning, so that record-breaker/holder becomes რეკორდსმენი; other anglicisms arise
via Russian (ქილერი, which means ‘hitman’, rather than ‘killer’). Many direct imports deal
with new concepts and things, e.g. ბეიბისიტ(ერ)ი.
Gochitashvili and Shabashvili point out that an anglicism that supplants a Russianism or
Georgian word may have different aura: ბიზნესმენი is positive, საქმოსიანი, its equivalent
in Soviet times, was negative. ლუზერი (loser) is much more effective as a term of contempt
than the periphrastic მუდამ დამარცხებული recommended by conservative academics,
which is objective, even sympathetic.13


8. What to do?
Beridze recommends banning anglicisms that have one-word native equivalents.14 Even the
French have failed despite their geriatric académie and their centralised school curriculum.
Only a North Korean system might succeed.
Russianisms, however undesirable they may seem, have not gone away. They are quite a
different matter, and they survive despite the diminished role of Russian and Russians in
Georgia – often because they are very creative and witty macaronic language, entered in a
different way over different periods, through different classes of speakers (via the military,
prisons, as lingua franca in the Caucasus, often as joke or gang language): დამიპადიეზდა


11
   “ხომ დღითიდღე მრავლდება”: Tuskia 2014: 156.
12
   Davitishvili 2018: 22–27.
13
   Shabashvili and Gochitashvili 2021: 6.
14
   Beridze 2023: 270–271.

                                               22
       Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

‘ambushed me in the entrance’, დამიაბგონა ‘outran/overtook me’. Omiadze notes the
persistence of გატრუპვა ‘to kill sb/to make a corpse from sb’, გაიასნება ‘to make sth clear’
> გამიიასნდა ‘it became clear to me’, იქით გაგიიასნებ თუ გინდა ‘I’ll make it clear to you
later, if you like’, გასროქვა, ‘to be sentenced to imprisonment’, დაპადერჟკება ‘to give
support’.15
Russian auxiliary words were totally integrated all over the Caucasus several decades ago:
ვაფშე, ჩესნად, კაროჩე are perceived merely as sub-literary. Russian, when borrowed,
sometimes undergoes a radical change of meaning: დაიზმენდა or იზმენაში მოვიდა means
‘began to have doubts, or backed out’, but no longer means ‘changed or betrayed’.


9. Changes in service industries
Modern motor mechanics now replace Russianisms with Georgian or English: დვორნიკი has
given way to მინასწმენდი and მაყუჩი replaces გლუშიტელი since motor mechanics are no
longer predominantly Armenians who use Russian to communicate with Georgian customers.
In a few cases, Russian names for mechanical parts have remained: ფრთის ქვედა საფარი is
too clumsy to replace Russian პადკრილნიკი, but დგუში has superseded პორშინი. Some
anglicisms have taken over: for instance ბრეკეტი (English bracket) replaces სალასკა,
აირბაგები still dominates over საჭის უსაფრთხოების ბალიში, and სანიავო has not
replaced ვენტილატორი nor has ნიავება ousted ვენტილაცია. The process in which
Russian is ousted, but English does not replace it, is found in electrical and plumbing terms:
დამაგრძელებელი replaces უდლინიტელი, and სამკაპი has ousted ტრაინიკი. One
English term, however, is common, ფიტინგი: ლატუნის ფიტინგი სამკაფი ‘brass three-
point fitting’.
In business language the English origin of some words is not obvious: they may sound
Georgian, or even oriental: დისპუტები is used to mean discussions, while რითრითი, with a
syllable division quite unlike English ‘retreat’, has largely Buddhist/Tibetan associations, for
instance in იოგატური რითრითი: it has purely meditational meaning and is mainly restricted
to hotels with yoga and gurus – the word has lost any military connotations. Material for
business retreats and courses often reads like English in the Georgian alphabet: რითრითი
implies უორკშოპები ბიზნეს სამიტზე, ფასილიტატორი, სპიკერი who will talk of
წარმატებულ ქეისებს. Management is taken over by მენეჯმენტი, out of the hands of any
მმართველი.


10. The role of sport in standardising international vocabulary
Sporting terms have taken on a duality ever since competition became international after the
fall of the USSR, thus in rugby:
      Referee can be რეფერი or მსაჯი
      Linesman – ლაინსმენი or გვერდითი მსაჯი
      Offside – ოფსაიდი or თამაშგარე
      Fan – ფანი or გულშემატკივარი
      Half-back – ჰავბეკი or ნახევარმცველი
      Forward – ფორვარდი or თავდამსხმელი.


15
     Omiadze 2007.

                                              23
                                          Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

For rugby terminology, Z. Gigineishvili has provided an extensive account.16 From 1959 to
1986, when Georgians played only within the Communist bloc, Russian terms (რეგბი for
რაგბი) predominated. But after 1989 ‘goal’ became ლელო instead of ცდა or დამიწება,
although ლელობურთი, despite being the traditional name of Georgian handball, failed to
replace the English name of the game. One traditional Georgian sporting term, შერკინება,
derived from wrestling, has become the word for ‘scrum’, while other anglicisms have also
been ousted: ჰუქერი has given way to კვაჭი. Most English terms have been replaced by
calques, e.g. dead ball becomes უქმი ბურთი; sometimes Georgian and English co-exist: ბექი
or მეზურგე (but ფულბეკი ‘full back’, and ჰავბექი ‘half back’). A few terms are taken from
Beria’s football terminology: პირველი მგეზავი ‘fly half’.
Tennis has a longer, if interrupted history in Georgia, with a pre-revolutionary admixture of
English, so that დაბრეიკება means ‘breaking (someone’s serve)’, and რეკეტი, სერვერი,
მიტინგი (meaning ‘rally’), მატჩი, სეტი are well established: სიყვარული (‘love’) is, of
course, a calque. Tennis was first in Tbilisi around 1910: the viceroy Vorontsov-Dashkov’s
Tbilisi ლაუნ-ტენისი club, run by Russian women (the viceroy’s wife and wife of his chief of
staff, Anastasia Peterson), and later the Batumi Boulevard Club made it fashionable. English
had already begun to infiltrate, when in the Russian empire French governesses began to be
replaced by English and Scottish governesses, whom the lady of the house would feel safe to
have in close contact with her husband. (Remember Anna Karenina, where the French
governess who upsets the Oblonsky household in the beginning of the novel, is replaced by the
reliable British Miss Goole, who takes care of Anna’s second child.) English governesses
sometimes stayed on, even after the revolution, and educated their charges (and, when they
married their widowed employers, their own children) to speak English almost as native
speakers. In Georgia this happened in at least one Tsereteli and Chanturia household, and
produced a small, but influential core of English linguistic influence.
Football, ფეხბურთი, was, however, well supplied from the start with a Georgian terminology.
Lavrenti Beria (himself a volley-ball player whose Tbilisi house included a gym) founded
Tbilisi Dinamo as a team for Chekisty to keep fit. By the 1930s chekisty had become too fat or
old, so that young men, often orphans of those shot by Beria, were recruited, trained in the
NKVD building where their parents were tortured. Nevertheless, some English terms have
infiltrated Georgian football: გოლი, ფორვარდი, ჰედერი, მატჩი, ოფსაიდი, დრიბლინგი.
Otherwise, the game uses well established Georgian terms.


11. Future prospects
The weakness of linguistics as a science lies in its poor predictive value: what will happen in
the decades to follow is uncertain. One prediction is a spread of usage among the population:
54% of mature respondents reported that they customarily use ‘barbarian’ anglicisms. Critics
note the integration of words like ტრენდი, ლუზერი, ნეთვორქი into normal literary texts,
others have recognised such ‘barbarisms’ as წავედით საშოპინგოდ ‘we went shopping’ as
the consequence of Georgian’s lack of pithy phrases, especially since the kind of shopping
involved is window-shopping, as well as actual purchasing.
The English language often fails to generate a Georgian equivalent: FAQ remains as a
hieroglyph for ‘frequently asked questions’, and ‘unsubscribe’ is still translated periphrastically
as გამოწერის გაუქმება.

16
     Gigineishvili 2014; cf. also Gigineishvili 2009 for examples.

                                                          24
       Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

The failure of Georgian users to arrive at an agreed standard form leads to multiple terminology:
there are several versions of download – ჩამოტვირთვა, გადმოტვირთვა, გადმოწერა etc.
The problem of choosing an ejective versus aspirate unvoiced plosive in borrowings from
English makes standardisation difficult. We see the substitution of ფ (which usually represents
f) for პ in ფუბლიქი, ფლაგინი, ფოსტი, ფართი, ფლეი(ბოი), as well as all Hellenic words
beginning with ფსი-, but not in პლეერი.
Likewise, the aspirated plosive is less common than ejective when transcribing k/c. The
exceptions are many, however: ქილერი, ქეში, ქუქი, ქულერი, ქანთრი (child’s car seat can
be either ქარსიტი or ქარსითი), but most other initial c and k are represented by კ-: კეჩუპი,
კენგურუ.
In the case of t the ejective is normal (თ being more often used for th), but there are notable
exceptions: თოქ შოუ, თრილერი, თორების პარტია, თეგი (tag), თაიბრექი, თრეში
(trash); otherwise any initial t- becomes ტ-.
Undoubtedly, the Anglo-Georgian to be found on on internet blogs and forums is a chaotic
creole and is likely to evolve into something more stable: take for instance, ‘Magda’, who
writes: ბლოგზე, უამრავ სიახლეს დავდებ სელებრითების..შოუბიზნესის...
მოდის შესახებ...17


12. Likely consequences for Georgian phonology and morphology
One positive result for Georgian phonology is the revival of a lost letter, ჲ replacing initial y in
ჲოგურტი, ჲახტა, ჲუნორი. But borrowing from English might possibly lead to the
marginalisation, or at least the reduction in frequency, of consonants that do not occur in
English: ჭ, ყ, წ, ძ, ჟ, ღ. The loss of distinction, or arbitrary choices. between aspirated and
ejectives – ფ/პ, ქ/კ. თ/ტ may eventually lead to the blurring of an important phonemic quality
of Georgian.
One can also anticipate morphological problems, particularly in verbs: neologisms show a lack
of determinacy – what stem do they have, -ვა or -ება? We usually have ატვიტერებს,
აფეისბუქებს, but others diversify, for instance აგუგლებს or, as a doctor writes, ვუძღვნი
ერთ ჩემს პაციენტს, რომელიც გუგლავს სიმპტომს და ისვამს სასტიკ
დიაგნოზებს. 18 We often see incomplete conjugation of verbs, and hesitation over their
governance. E.g., is მილაიქებია an impersonal (inverted) verb replacing მომწონს, or is it
just the perfect tense of ვალაიქებ? Why doesn’t იქრინჯები have a causative *აქრინჯებს?
Languages with complex synthetic verbal morphology borrow mainly nouns and adjectives
which present fewer problems when inflections are required: typically, verbs are borrowed in
their ‘dictionary’ form and exempted from most inflections. Languages that conjugate with the
aid of auxiliaries (Basque eduki/izan, Turkish etmek/kilmek, Farsi kardan, etc) just borrow a
verb in its often invariable infinitive, supine or aorist form, whereas Russian and Georgian,
when they borrow, feel obliged to integrate a verb into a system with a variety of stems in order
to conjugate it: hence the uncertainties and difficulties.
Will these ‘barbarisms’ die out? Some will, because they are awkward and alien. It is, however,
a mistake to think that teenagers will abandon their ‘jargon’ as they emerge from their bedrooms


17
     Lomaia 2011.
18
     Panjikidze 2019.

                                                25
                                      Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

and volatile groups to mix with others at work, or to run a household. Smartphone users keep
their phones, stay on Reddit, WhatsApp, Facebook (Meta) or Twitter (X) and will continue to
exchange views on life, love, friends and shopping, in the same language. New groups
(neighbourhood watches, colleagues at work) continue communicating on phone, pad and using
the same vocabulary, even if there are going to be fewer ქრაშები or დასინულები than in
adolescence.
Shorter words will always win over longer ones. ლუზერი over მუდმივ დამარცხებული.
Note the victories of English over French, thanks to the laconicism of the former and
effusiveness of the latter: the warning to drivers virages en épingles à cheveux is far more easily
assimilated in time by the monosyllabic hair pin bends.


References

Beridze (2023): Nato B., “The Trend of Deverbalization of Anglicisms in the Georgian Digital Vocabulary”, Recep
     Tayyip Erdoğan University Journal of Social Sciences 10/1, 264–272. https://dergipark.
     org.tr/en/pub/rteusbe/issue/78332/1308392.
Davitishvili (2018): Natia D., “On the Integration of Anglicisms Into Present-Day Georgian”, Canadian Academy
    of Oriental and Occidental Culture, Studies in Literature and Language 17/3, 22–27.
    https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/236304495.pdf.
Gigineishvili (2009): ქართული რაგბის მატიანე, 1959–2009. შემდგენლები: ზაალ, ლუკა, ნიკო
    გიგინეიშვილი.        თბილისი:  ოლიმპო.    https://elfiles.emis.ge/uploads/6992/conversions/1150-
    compressed.pdf.
— (2014): ზაალ გიგინეიშვილი, “რაგბის ქართული ტერმინოლოგია” / Zaal G., “The Georgian
   Terminology of Rugby”, ტერმინოლოგიის საკითხები / Terminology Issues 2014/1, 74–80.
   http://termbank.ge/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/term2014.pdf.
Gochitashvili & Shabashvili (2021): გოციტაშვილი, ქეთევან & გიული შაბაშვილი (2021): “ინგლისური
    ნასესხობების სემანტიკური ჯგუფები და მათი პრაგმატული რეალიზაცია თანამედროვე
    ქართულ ენაში”, researchgate.net. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348930368.
Halamadrid (2022): Real Madrid C. F Georgian Fan Club Halamadrid.ge, News ID 76331, 13.4.2022, 20:47.
    http://halamadrid.ge/index.php?newsid=76331.
Lomaia (2011): “About me”, Magda’s Blog, 25.11.2011. http://magdalomaia.blogspot.com/.
Lominadze (2016): “ტესტი: როგორი ფეისბუქ ფრენდი ხართ?” ლალი ლომინაძე. On.ge, 30.6.2016, 12:05.
   https://on.ge/story/1761.
Mayakovsky (1933): “ვლადიმერ მაიაკოვსკის გამოუქვეყნებული ლექსი Ответ В. Маяаковского на тост
   В. Гуния,” სალიტერატურო გაზეთა 23 (60), 31.10.1933, [2]. https://iverieli.nplg.gov.ge/
   handle/1234/152040.
Mosiashvili (2021): “არა მხოლოდ ტროლები: ადრეული ინტერნეტ კულტურა, "გართობა" და
    გარიყული სიცილის ხანძრები.” Giorgi Mosiashvili, original article by Whitney Phillips.
    https://giorgimose.medium.com/28ce7e29ce22.
Nicole (1858): Pensées de Pascal, précédées de sa vie par Mme Périer, sa sœur, suivies des Pensées de Nicole, et
    de son Traité de la paix avec les hommes. Paris: Firmin Didot. https://books.google.de/books
    ?id=tO4wAQAAMAAJ.
Niny (2018): “გაჩითული.” bidzer.ge, 4.7.2018. https://www.bidzer.ge/word/1663.
Omiadze (2007): სალომე ომიაძე, “ჟარგონი თანამედროვე ქართულ დისკურსში / Jargon in Modern
   Georgian Discourse”, გელათის მეცნიერებათა აკადემიის ჟურნალი / Journal of Gelati Academy of
   Sciences 2007/6, 3–9.



                                                      26
    Donald Rayfield, The Indigestible Impact of English on the Modern Georgian Lexicon

Panjikidze (2019): “ვუძღვნი ერთ ჩემს პაციენტს, რომელიც გუგლავს სიმპტომს, ისვამს სასტიკ
     დიაგნოზებს და ამ აღმოჩენისგან ხდება ცუდად”. ნათია ფანჯიკიძე, Fortuna.ge, 17.9.2019.
     https://fortuna.ge/fortuna/post/vudzghvni-ert-chems-pacients-romelic-guglavs-simptoms-isvams-sastik-
     diagnozebs-da-am-aghmochenisgan-khdeba-cudad.
Tapnadze (2019): “რატომ არის ქართული ზმნა საოცარი – მარტივად.” ლელა ტაფნაძე, On.ge,
    11.10.2019, 15:55. https://on.ge/story/44515.
Turgenev (1868): Дымъ. Соч. Ив. Тургенева. Изданіе Братьев Салаевыхъ. Москва: Грачевъ.
    https://rusneb.ru/catalog/000199_000009_003582019/.
Tuskia (2014): მანანა ტუსკია, “ნასახელარ ზმნათა ჩამოყალიბების ისტორია და თანამედროვე
    ენობრივი სიტუაცია / The History of the Formation of Denominative Verbs and the Modern Language
    Situation”, ქართული სიტყვის კულტურის საკითხები / Issues of Culture of Georgian Word 14, 143–
    158. https://ice.ge/of/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Tuskia-M._14Tomi_143-158gv..pdf.




                     ინგლისური ენის დამღუპველი ზეგავლენა
                      თანამედროვე ქართული ენის ლექსიკაზე
                               დონალდ რეიფილდი (ლონდონი)


ქართულ ენაში ანგლიციზმების (ამერიკული და ბრიტანული) ერთსაუკუნოვანი მო-
ზღვავების ტალღას გასული საუკუნის 90-იანი წლებიდან ნასესხობათა ახალი, უფ-
რო ძლიერი ნაკადის შემოჭრა დაემატა სხვადასხვა შენაკადის სახით. ამ შენაკადე-
ბიდან ერთ-ერთი უკავშირდება ახალი პროდუქციის შემოტანას (მობილური ტელე-
ფონებით დაწყებული – სატვირთო ავტომობილებით დამთავრებული), ახალი წეს-
ჩვეულებების დამკვიდრებას (მორალური ღირებულებების ჩათვლით), თანამედრო-
ვე კომერციული ტრანსაქციების განხორციელებასა და სხვა სახის აქტივობებს,
რომელთა ამსახველი ლექსიკა (აღწერით პერიფრაზს თუ არ ჩავთვლით) ქართულ
ენას მანამდე არ გააჩნდა. შესაბამისად, ახალი პროდუქციის გამოყენება-დამკვიდ-
რებამ გამოიწვია უცხო სიტყვების მოძალება ქართულში, რომელთა დიდი ნაწილი
ანგლოსაქსური წარმოშობისაა.
მეორე შენაკადის გაჩენა განაპირობა გარკვეულ სფეროებში დამკვიდრებული რუ-
სიციზმების დაძლევის სურვილმა, კერძოდ, ავტომობილის სათადარიგო ნაწილე-
ბის დასახელებებში (ავტომობილების შეკეთების სფეროში ძირითადად რუსები და
სომხები მუშაობდნენ), სადაც რუსიციზმების განდევნა ორი გზით განხორციელდა:
ახალი ქართული სიტყვების შექმნის (ან გაცოცხლების) მეშვეობით ან რუსიციზმე-
ბის ანგლოსაქსური ტერმინებით ჩანაცვლების საშუალებით. ამგვარი პროცესები
მოიცავდა ისეთ სფეროებს, როგორიცაა, მაგალითად, რაგბი, ვინაიდან ქართველი
მერაგბეები 1959–1989 წლებში მხოლოდ სლავურ გუნდებთან თამაშობდნენ, ამჟა-
მად კი მსოფლიო ასპარეზზე გავიდნენ და საერთაშორისო ტურნირებში იღებენ მო-
ნაწილეობას.
პირად ურთიერთობებსა და ბიზნესში ინტერნეტის საყოველთაო გამოყენებამ გამო-
იწვია უცხო სიტყვების მესამე შენაკადის მოზღვავება და იმ ტერმინოლოგიის
შემოტანა, რომელსაც იყენებდა დასავლელი ინტერნეტმომხმარებელი და ბიზნეს-
სფერო. ამის ერთ-ერთი თვალსაჩინო მაგალითია სიტყვა „იშოპინგეთ!“ ‘Continue
shopping’. სამაგიეროდ, უკუპროცესს ჰქონდა ადგილი სლენგისა და ბილწსიტყვაო-


                                                   27
                          Digital Kartvelology 2, 2023

ბის სფეროში, სადაც აქტიურად დაიწყო საკუთრივ ქართული ლექსიკის გააქტიუ-
რება. 1990 წლებიდან „აფეთქდა“ ქართული სკაბრეზი. ნაბეჭდ პროდუქციაში გა-
ჩნდა ისეთი სიტყვები და ფრაზები, რომლებიც სულხან-საბა ორბელიანის ლექსი-
კონის შემდეგ აღარ გამოყენებულა წერილობითი ფორმით. ამ სფეროში არ შეიმ-
ჩნევა უცხოური ენების გავლენა (თუ არ ჩავთვლით ქართველი ებრაელების ლექსი-
კას).
მოცემული ნაშრომი ემყარება ემპირიულ მასალას, რომელიც ამოღებულია ინტერ-
ნეტფორუმებიდან, კომერციული მასალებიდან, ლაშა ბუღაძის რომანებიდან, პიე-
სებიდან, რომლებიც 2013 წელს საკონკურსოდ იყო წარდგენილი სათარგმნად და
ლონდონის სამეფო თეატრში დასადგმელად და სხვ.
ჩვენი წინასწარი დასკვნით, 1990 წლიდან მოყოლებული ქართული ენა წალეკა
უცხოური სიტყვების მძლავრმა ტალღამ, რომლის „მონელებასაც“ ჯერჯერობით
ვერ ახერხებს ენა, და რომელმაც ისეთივე ზარალი მიაყენა ქართულ ენას, როგო-
რიც ირანულმა მეათე საუკუნეში და რუსულმა – მეცხრამეტე საუკუნის დასაწყის-
ში. მაგრამ როგორც ადრეული უცხოური გავლენების შემთხვევაში, აქაც იგივე
პროცესი განვითარდება – ქართული ენა ნაწილობრივ შეითვისებს ან უკუაგდებს
უცხოურ ლექსიკას და დაიტოვებს უცხოური ენობრივი ერთეულების მხოლოდ იმ
ნაწილს, რომელიც მისაღები იქნება და ბუნებრივად ინტეგრირდება ენაში. ამ პრო-
ცესში ბევრი რამ დამოკიდებულია ნორმებისა და ინოვაციების ბალანსზე, რომე-
ლიც უნდა დამყარდეს, ერთი მხრივ, ძლიერ და კონსერვატიულ სასკოლო-სასწავ-
ლო დაწესებულებებსა და, მეორე მხრივ, აქტიურ და ანარქიულ ინტერნეტსაზოგა-
დოებას შორის. ამ პროცესში კიდევ ერთ ფაქტორს აქვს განსაკუთრებული მნიშვნე-
ლობა, ეს არის ახალ ლექსემათა ფონოლოგიური სტრუქტურა. ისეთი სიტყვები,
როგორებიცაა „რითრითი“ (‘retreat’) და „დაიგუგლება“ (‘can be googled’), შედგება
იმგვარი ხმოვნებისა და თანხმოვნებისგან, რომლებიც ადვილად ინტეგრირდება
ქართულში, მაგრამ ისეთმა სიტყვამ, როგორიცაა „აბეკაპებს“ (‘backs up’), კონკუ-
რენცია უნდა გაუწიოს ფრანკო-რუსულ პერიფრაზს „სარეზერვოდ ადუბლირებს“.
ანგლიციზმების შემთხვევაში დამატებით სირთულეს წარმოშობს გრამატიკული
იმპლიკაცია. მაგალითად, „იშოპინგეთ“ ქართულში შემოტანილია ისეთი გარდამა-
ვალი ზმნის კონსტრუქციით, რომელიც სუბიექტს მოთხრობითში შეიწყობს. ეს
პროცესი შემჩნეულია „ერგატიულობისადმი მიდრეკილ“ სხვა ენებშიც, სადაც
უცხოური ენიდან შემოსული გარდაუვალი ზმნა ფორმდება ერგატიული კონ-
სტრუქციით, როგორც მაგალითად, ბასკურში: nere kochek ez du funtzionatzen „ჩემი
მანქანა არ მუშაობს“ ‘My car isn’t working’. (ამ წინადადების სტრუქტურული შესა-
ტყვისი ქართულში დასტურდება ნამყოში: „ჩემმა მანქანამ არ იმუშავა“).




                                      28
