Journal of Teaching and Education,
CD-ROM. ISSN: 2165-6266 :: 06(02):287–298 (2017)




LINGUO-CULTURAL AND PRAGMATIC PECULIARITIES OF THE
PHENOMENON OF ANGLICISATION IN GEORGIA


Nino Kirvalidze

Ilia State University, Georgia



The paper considers the phenomenon of anglicisation as a multifaceted developing process associated
with the increasing influx of English borrowings into the Georgian language. This process is related to
the growing American influence as well as to the prestigious role of English as a lingua franca in almost
every aspect of life at a global level. The inf lux of English words into Georgian is characterised
by a number of socio-cultural and linguo-pragmatic peculiarities due to the sharp political
changes and dynamic introduction of the market economy that have taken place since the
country won its independence after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The research is based
on the linguistic and pragmatic analysis of English lexical units imported into Georgian in the late
90-s and the first fifteen years of the new millennium. The survey has shown that Georgia
welcomes English as an international medium of communication with the outside world, while it
protects and promotes the Georgian language within the country as a means of national identity and
cultural heritage.

Keywords: Anglicisation, Influx of English loan words, Multifaceted global process, Linguistic and
pragmatic factors of anglicisation.



Introduction: Different Attitudes towards the Phenomenon of Anglicisation

The paper considers the phenomenon of anglicisation in Georgia as a developing process associated with
the icreasing influx of English borrowings into Georgian in the last 25 years since the country gained its
independence after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Georgia (Sakartvelo í in the Georgian language)
is a small country with ancient culture located at the crossroads of Eastern Europe and Western Asia in
the Caucasus region of Eurasia. The change of the country’s political orientation, as well as the
democratisation of the society and its aspiration towards NATO and EU integration, have replaced the use
of the Russian language by English due to the growth of both American influence and the prestigious role
of English as a lingua franca in almost every aspect of life at a global level: politics, technology, science,
business, mass media, communication, education, lifestyle, entertainment, etc.
     The term anglicism etymologically derives from the word England and it was first used in the 17th
century in connection with English expressions used in other languages (Oxford English Dictionary,
1989). Today its meaning has broadened, as the term is generally used to refer to English loans
originating both from England and the States. Therefore, the term americanism is viewed as a subordinate
of the term anglicism for the borrowings from the US.




                                                        287
288     Linguo-Cultural and Pragmatic Peculiarities of the Phenomenon of Anglicisation in Georgia


       Attitudes differ towards the phenomenon of anglicisation. The increasing international influence of
 English has been both welcomed and criticized by many. While some appreciate its political, economic
 and cultural advantages, others are sensitive to a possible threat to other languages and cultures. From the
 viewpoint of linguistics, lexical borrowing is a natural process which has been going on since the
 beginning of languages and language-induced contact. It cannot be denied that borrowing from foreign
 languages facilitates and enriches communication.
       Yet, several scholars have pointed to possible risks of a global language. David Crystal gave a full
 treatment to these risks in his book Language Death (2000). A global language might cultuvate an elite
 monolingual linguistic class, more complacent and dismissive in their attitudes towards other languages;
 or those who have such a language at their disposal í especially those who have it as a mother-tongue –
 might manipulate it to their own advantage at the expense of those who do not have it; or a global
 language might hasten the disappearance of minority languages; or – the ultimate threat – “make all other
 languages unnecessary” (Crystal 2003: 15).
       However, the critique of the anglicisms is not so much about the fact that language is a means of
 communication, but rather about language being a symbol of the national and cultural identity of a
 speech community. “Anglicisms embody Anglophone or American social and cultural values, which can
 be perceived as a threat to one’s own values” í such was the attitude of French, German, Italian, Polish
 and Russian linguists at the Regensburg International Conference named Anglicisms in Europe (2006).
 These scholars warn that, with the most positive attitude to the social intention of obtaining universal
 basis for communication, the world should stay alert on the English language aggression into other
 tongues’ territories since there is a threat of a linguistic genocide as the absorption of minor cultures by
 the dominating language (the invader-tongue). For instance, T. Maximova from Russia discusses two
 scenarios reflecting different attitudes to the phenomenon of anglicisation: pessimistic and optimistic.
 According to the pessimistic scenario, there might be “a war” between languages claiming to dominate,
 which finally might lead to the effect of Babylon Tower. As a result, national cultures will be destroyed,
 cultural identities will totally disappear. From the optimistic viewpoint, this process of anglicisation can
 be resisted by two major factors. The most important one would be the language feature based on the
 power of the culture this language serves to. That is, the self-clearance of the language that helps get rid
 of alien language elements due to internal linguistic regulations. Temporal character of language
 influence would make another resistance: it presupposes short-termed existence of borrowings in the
 recipient language (Maximova 2006).
       Nowadays, of all European countries it is France that has displayed the most organized and
 institutional purism directed against the influx of anglicisms. This picture was examined critically in the
 article by John Humbley (2008: 85-105), who questions the view of French as less susceptible to Anglo-
 Saxon influence than many other European languages. The author presents data on the influx of lexical
 anglicisms in French, German, Italian, Spanish and Rumanian, quoting the results of comparative studies
 and focusing in particular on the methods and sources available for such an examination. ėrsi, another
 French scholar, concentrates on the etymological aspects of eliminating anglicisms from French in his
 paper The De-Anglicization of the Vocabulary of Informatics in French which is concerned with the
 techniques applied in the process of “frenchification” on the example of special vocabulary. The author
 discusses contact-induced motivation and strategies for the forms of French equivalents, such as their
 phonological or graphemic similarity to English source items, and transparency of semantic relationships
 as another type of motivation for replacements (ėrsi 2008: 208-221). However, in view of the fact that
 more than half of the English vocabulary today originates from French, it has a certain ironical tinge that
 French commissions nowadays try to ban the English element from the French word stock.
       In fact, this unwarranted purism should be replaced by the analysis of the rationale for using such
 linguistic innovations. The communicator’s social and economic intentions, such as maintaining
 professional credibility, confirming social expectations and compliance with the conventions of a given
 genre, can be considered as the rational motivation behind the lexical choice in favour of contact-induced
 items. Finally, other pragmatic factors, such as technical and time-saving considerations in the process of
 translation, may also play a considerable role in the choice of anglicisms.
                                                                                    Nino Kirvalidze     289


     In order to avoid negative connotations of English borrowings, linguists distinguish between
languages of communication and languages of identifications (Crystal 2003). The advantage of this
distinction is that English and one’s own language are not perceived as competitors but rather as
complementary possibilities of communication. Therefore, anglicisms should function as a means of
communication and not of identification. But it is a fact that many people do not perceive the transfer of
certain English or even “pseudo-English” words into their language through the advertising media or the
entertaining industry as a meaningful kind of communication, but rather as an attempt to take over their
national and cultural values.
     A considerable contribution to the study of anglicisms has been made by Görlach’s lexicographical
project involving 16 European countries (Görlach 2001, 2002). Scholars participating in it observed that
English was distributed relatively unevenly in the vocabulary of European languages, and this was
predetermined by the history of the respective country, its connections with the Western world or with the
United States, and also by its size and closeness of contacts. In countries like Denmark, Sweden, Norway
and the Netherlands the influx of English terms has been widely accepted for decades and considered as a
natural phenomenon, contrary to Eastern European countries like Poland, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria or
Russia, where anglicisms have been gaining ground especially since the dissolution of the Soviet Union
(Görlach 2002). Besides, countries with less than 10 million native speakers are more flexible than others
as they are more concerned about the exchange with other countries than nations with 50 or 80 million
speakers (cf. Juaristi 2008: 47-72).
     At present the majority of scholars support the Würzburg Declaration on European Language
Policy, which maintains the cultural and linguistic diversity of the European countries. English as a
lingua franca should not replace linguistic diversity as a tertiary language since “only an active and
intensified language policy corresponding to the cultural diversity of the European countries can
guarantee the future of the European Union” (Ahrens 2003: 435). Both a lingua franca and a national
language are wished for. The increasing interconnectedness and confluence with all parts of the world
should be regarded as a necessary incentive to concerning oneself with one’s own cultural identity and
heritage, leading to its appreciation, promotion and protection.


Theoretical Framework of the Research: Borrowing and Related Terms

Researches on anglicisms concentrate on several main areas pertaining to borrowing, assimilation and
integration processes, as well as on the criteria that account for the cognitive processes involved in the
introduction of new contact-induced lexical items. Linguists focus on the main strategies concerning
contact-induced lexical innovations, such as importation of a word from the source language, analogical
innovation and independent innovation, and their further subdivisions based on the degree of adaptation
and the presence of word-formation processes or semantic change. The fundamental issues widely
discussed are the contexts of use which promote these different strategies, the speaker-related and hearer-
related cognitive operations involved in each of them and the cognitive and communicative aspects which
determine later uses of the resulting contact-induced items, etc. (Winter-Froemel 2008: 16-41; Alexieva
2008: 42-51; Dunn 2008: 52-71).
     But what exactly is a borrowing? Though phonological, morphological and syntactic borrowings also
exist, the term is usually applied to words and their meanings. Borrowing denotes the process as well as
the object. As a process, it typically refers to the importation of a word or its meaning from one language
into another. As an object, it denotes the form and/or the meaning of the item that originally was not part
of the vocabulary of the recipient language but was adopted from some other language and made part
of the borrowing language’s vocabulary.
     A second cause for the fuzziness of the term borrowing is its use for a subgroup of borrowing,
namely lexical borrowing, in contrast to semantic borrowing. Lexical borrowings are also called loan
words or loans. Both the form and the meaning of a foreign word become imported, and not only the
meaning as is the case with semantic borrowing. Lexical borrowing is equated with direct borrowing,
290       Linguo-Cultural and Pragmatic Peculiarities of the Phenomenon of Anglicisation in Georgia


i.e. a borrowing whose form is transferred directly from the source language, and not via another
language, the latter case being usually called indirect borrowing.
      A mixture of lexical and semantic borrowing results in hybrid formations, also called mixed
compounds, semi-calques or loan blends, denoting a word or word combination that consists of elements
of both source and receiver languages. Sometimes the expression total substitution is used for semantic
loans, and partial substitution for hybrid formations. However, lexical borrowings in this terminology are
not substitutions but importations.
      Finally, there are pseudo-borrowings, or pseudo-loans. These are words or word elements in
languages other than English that were borrowed from English but are used in a way native English
speakers would not recognize. Pseudo-anglicisms often take the form of blends, combining elements
of multiple English words to create a new word. An example of such pseudo-anglicism in Georgian is
klip-meikeri (clip-maker), which is used to refer to a music video director. Another example of a pseudo-
anglicism is rekorsmeni (recordsman) which corresponds to English record-holder in sport. Pseudo-
borrowing can occur both on the formal and semantic level. For instance, the Georgian word zumeri
(zoomer) is a lexical pseudo-loan, used to denote a continuous low-pitched signal, usually of a telephone.
The word was coined on the basis of the English word to zoom and –er word-building suffix, though this
lexeme does not exist in English.
      Whether a word is perceived as foreign or not is also related to its degree of adaptation or
nativization. Both terms refer to the adjustment of spelling, pronunciation and/or morphology of loan
words to the structure of the receptor language. The degree of adaptation reflects the closeness of the
contact and attitudes of the affected speech community. Adaptation is distinguished from adoption,
which is defined as unmodified borrowing. However in practice, many scholars use adaptation and
adoption synonymously, since few completely non-adjusted borrowings exist, at least regarding
pronunciation.
      Thus, we have discussed some universal terms and concepts of lexical borrowing that form the
theoretical framework for linguistic classification of anglicisms in any language, including Georgian. The
purpose of the present paper is, first, to define linguistically most typical groups of anglicisms, imported
into Georgian for the last 25 years, and then discuss socio-cultural and pragmatic peculiarities of their
functioning in various discourse types.


Linguistic Classification of Anglicisms in Georgian

The research has shown that, like many European languages, Modern Georgian distinguishes three main
groups of anglicisms:
      1. lexical, i.e. direct borrowings, when an English word is imported together with its form and
         meaning (or part of the meaning);
      2. transliterated, i.e. indirect borrowings, which refer to loan formations in the Georgian language
         coined by analogy with their English etymons’ structure and meaning;
      3. semantic borrowings, i.e. when the borrowed meaning of an English etymon extends the meaning
         of a Georgian word broadening thus its referential field.

Lexical or Direct Borrowings

The analysis of anglicisms has revealed that there are two main groups of directly imported loan words in
Georgian:
      a) loan words, that maintain English pronunciation and form. This group of anglicisms comprises
         terminological lexis, mostly word-combinations denoting different items and concepts of
         technology, science, art, mass-media, etc. For instance: egzit-poli (exit poll); beibi-siTeri (baby-
                                                                                     Nino Kirvalidze    291


       sitter); konsaltingi (consulting); fabi (pub); isTebliSmenTi (establishment); ofis-menejeri (office
       manager); daijesti (digest); bilbordi (billboard); masmedia (mass-media), etc.
    b) loan acronyms that have similar pronunciation and form in Georgian as their English etymons.
       For instance: nato (NATO), iunesko (UNESCO), unisefi (UNICEF), esemesi (SMS), ikao (ICAO),
       biseki (BSEC), piari (PR),dijei (DJ), opeki (OPEC), mapi (MAP), bibisi (BBC), sieneni (CNN),
       nasa (NASA), lazeri (LASER), etc.
There are also some early borrowed anglicisms, that are phonetically and morphologically integrated into
the Georgian language to such extent that it is difficult to recognise them as English. For instance, the
word title has developed a whole set of derivatives constituting a separate word-family in the Georgian
language with the help of Georgian word-building suffixes: tituli, titulovani, satitulo. Or the English word
irony, which is also fully integrated into Georgian, having built its own word-family: ironia, ironiuli,
ironiulad, ironizireba, etc.
     It is almost a truism that “when a country adopts a language it adapts it in different ways” (Crystal
2003: 16). In other words, when an English word is directly imported into another language, it undergoes
some orthographic, phonological and morphological changes until it becomes integrated into the receiver
language. Georgian distinguishes four possible variants of spelling of directly imported anglicisms:
    1. anglicisms are spelt by analogy with their English etymons’ pronunciation (e.g.: bumi < boom;
       barmeni < barman; ragbi < rugby; imiji < image, etc.);
    2. the spelling of an anglicism fully coincides with the spelling of its English etymon (e.g.: bardi
       < bard; gangsteri < gangster; monitori < monitor; interneti < Internet, etc.);
    3. the spelling of an anglicism coincides partly with the pronunciation and partly with the spelling of
       its English etymon (e.g.: overʯaimi < overtime; spidometri < speedometer; matCpointi
       < match point, etc.);
    4. the spelling of an anglicism is formed under the influence of the mediator language, mostly
       Russian, through which it was imported into Georgian (e.g.: Jiuri < jury; biujeti < budget;
       partniori < partner, etc.).
Pronunciation of directly imported anglicisms is influenced by the peculiarities (that is, similarity-
dissimilarity) of the phonological systems of both source and receiver languages. The research has shown
that, due to these factors, anglicisms of this group undergo three types of phonological adaptation in the
Georgian language:
    1. zero transphonemization, i.e. when an anglicism is pronounced very close to its etymon due to the
       fact that both source and receiver languages possess similar sounds (e.g.: zumi [zumѢ] < zoom;
       dedlaini [dedlaѢnѢ] < deadline; lideri [lѢderѢ] < leader, etc.). It should be noted that most
       anglicisms take the Georgian ending –i [ܼ] as a morphological marker of adaptation;
    2. partial transphonemization, i.e. when the pronunciation of an anglicism only partly coincides with
       the pronunciation of its etymon due to the fact that some elements differ phonologically in them.
       For instance: televizia [televѢzѢa] < television; sporti [sportѢ] < sport; kompania [kompanѢa]
       < company, etc.;
    3. full transphonemization, i.e. when some English phonetical elements, that have no equivalents in
       the Georgian phonetical system, are substituted freely in an anglicism. Free transphonemization
       refers mainly to English etymons with [w] and [f] in their pronunciation (e.g.: uikendi [uѢkendѢ]
       < weekend; forvardi [porvardѢ] < forward, flirti [plѢrtѢ] < flirt, etc.).
By analogy with the phonological changes discussed above, we have singled out three main variants of
morphological adaptation of directly imported anglicisms in Georgian:
    1. levelling transmorphemization, i.e. when most imported anglicism take the Georgian suffixal
       inflexion of the nominative case –i [I], which is considered to be a universal morphological
       marker of their adaptation to the Georgan language. For instance: blefi < bluff; testi < test; starti
       < start, etc.;
292       Linguo-Cultural and Pragmatic Peculiarities of the Phenomenon of Anglicisation in Georgia


      2. partial transmorphemization, i.e. when an anglicism retains the suffix of its English etymon in
         some morphological form, while it adds a Georgian suffixal inflexion in its oppositional form.
         For instance, most anglicisms represented by nouns retain the English suffix -er in the singular,
         while their plural forms are coined with the help of the Gerogian suffixal inflection –ebi (ebi),
         replacing the English inflexion –s. E.g.:
         (sing.) spikeri [spѢkerѢ ]< speaker; (pl.) spikerebi [spѢkerebѢ ] < speakers; (sing.) testeri [testerѢ]
         < tester;     (pl.) testerebi [testerebѢ] < testers;

         (sing.) skaneri [skanerѢ] < scanner; (pl.) skanerebi [skanerebѢ] < scanners,

         There are cases when an anglicism retains its etymon’s suffix and, at the same time, additionally
         takes a Georgian suffix –eli/-uli, which is synonymous with the English one in its meaning. For
         instance: vegetarianeli [vegetarѢaneli] < vegetarian; eqstravagantuli [ekstravagantuli]
         < extravagant , etc..
      3. full transmorphemization, i.e. when the suffix of an English etymon can be substituted by a
         Georgian suffix with the same meaning and function. For instance, the English adjectivel suffix –
         ic is frequently substituted by the Georgian adjectival suffixal allomorphs –eli /-uli /-uri:
         sarkastuli [sarkastulѢ] < sarcastic; ironiuli [ironiulܼ] < ironic; analizuri [analizurܼ < analytic;
         fantastiuri pantastiurܼ] < fantastic , etc.
It is worth mentioning that the majority of directly imported anglicisms are represented by nouns, since
people usually borrow new concepts and things with their names, and most of them take the suffixal
inflexion of the nominative case –i [I], which is considered, as it has been mentioned above, to be a
universal morphological marker of their adaptation to the Georgan language.
      As regards verbal and adjectival anglicisms, they are also coined according to the Georgian word-
buillding rules. Hence, verbs are formed by means of Georgian verbal suffixes         -reba (-reba) / -roba
(-roba): boikotireba [boѢkotѢreba] < boycott; investireba [ѢnvestѢreba] < invest, adaptireba [adaptѢreba]
< adapt; testireba [testѢreba] < test; etc.). Adjectives are also modelled by analogy with Georgian forms
via suffixation or prefix-suffixation (e.g.: klasikuri [klasѢkuri] < classic; dinamiuri [dѢnamѢurѢ] <
dynamic; aqtiuri [aktѢurѢ] < active; saskolo avtobusi [saskolo avtobusܼ] < school bus, sagazeTo statia
[sagazeto statܼa] < newspaper article, etc.).

Transliterated or Indirect Borrowings

Anglicisms of this type are represented by loan formations, mainly Georgian word-combinations that are
coined by analogy with their English etymons with the help of translation. Many linguists, mostly purists,
give preference to the use of transiletarated anglicisms over their direct importation into a receptor
language. Degree of closeness of transliterated anglicisms to their etymons varies and this makes it
possible to subdivide them into the following groups:
      a) loan translations or calques, which imply complete translation of a borrowing. This group of
         transliterated anglicisms is quite numerous and most frequently used in Georgian. For instance:
            Georgian adamianis uflebebi < EEnglish Human rights
            Georgian pirveli ledi      < English First lady
            Georgian civi omi           <   English Cold War
            Georgian rkinis farda        < English Iron Curtain
            Georgian sisxlis banki       < English Blood bank
            Georgian mikrotalRuri        < English microwave
                                                                                   Nino Kirvalidze   293


         Georgian xelburTi         < English      handball
        Georgian savaWro niSani < English trademark
   b) loan rendering or semi-calques, which imply partial translation of a borrowing retaining the
      meaning of its English etymon. Such transliterated anglicisms are:
        Georgian caTambjeni       < English skyscraper
         Georgian piradi mcveli < English bodyguard
         Georgian maRviZara saaTi < English alarm clock
        Georgian aviafosta       < English airmail
   c) loan blends or mixed compounds, represented by a hybrid word or word-combination that
      consists of elements of both source and receiver languages.
        Georgian vebgverdi       < English website
         Georgian esemes mdivani <           Engish SMS Secretary
         Georgian avtomopasuxe < English autoresponder
         Georgian sim-baraTi      < English SIM-card
         Georgian maRali-riski < English high-risk
         Georgian neTgazeTi        < English Net Newspaper
   d) loan doublets, when an English word is borrowed by the Georgian language in two forms: a)
      directly, retaining the English etymon’s pronunciation and meaning, and b) indirectly via
      transliteration. Conider the following table:


English Loan Doublets in Georgian

           English etymons          Direct borrowings           Transliterated borrowings
       Public relations          fabliq rileiSenzi              sazogadoebasTan
                                                                urTierToba
       fast food                 fast fudi                      swrafi kvebis
                                                                obieqti
       babysitter                beibisiteri                    bavSvis momvleli
       second hand               seqondhendi                    meoradi saqoneli
       mass-media                masmedia                       masobrivi informaciis
                                                                saSualebebi
       cameraman                 kamerameni                     operatori


Semantic Borrowings

When an English word finds its way into another language, mostly only one or a couple of its individual
meanings are borrowed. Linguists often employ the term loan meaning to refer to the borrowing of a
meaning through meaning extension of a word in the recipient language. An example of loan meaning is
Georgian Tagvi (mouse): by analogy with the English word mouse in computer science, denoting “a small
hand-held input device used to move a cursor on the computer screen”, this new meaning of the word
mouse was extended to Georgian Tagvi (computer mouse). The same can be said about the Georgian
word mexsiereba (memory), that has also received a new technical meaning in connection with a
294      Linguo-Cultural and Pragmatic Peculiarities of the Phenomenon of Anglicisation in Georgia


 computer. Once a French borrowing menu (meniu) has extended its semantic structure by acquiring the
 new meaning again from the English computer domain í a list of options, usu. displayed on-screen
 showing the commands or facilities available. New additional meanings of these and other words, for
 example, resume are classical examples of semantic borrowing.
      Sometimes semantic borrowing gives a new life to a word of old Georgian origin in combination
 with an English word, denoting some modern concept. For instance, a hybrid loan blend í hit aRlumi (Hit
 Parade), which belongs to music terminological lexis. Thus, a loan meaning of an English etymon is
 added to a Georgian word extending its semantic structure.

 Socio-Cultural and Functional-Semantic Peculiarities of Anglicisms in Different Types of Georgian
 Discourse

 After the change of the Soviet regime in Georgia in the late 1990-s, all restrictions fell away and the
 veritable flood of English words started streaming in. It was not only a political question or one of mere
 fashion but there were too many new concepts arriving and too few people with the necessary knowledge
 of language to handle the problem. Although the majority of linguists, mainly Kartvelologists (i.e.,
 experts of the Georgian language), have been concerned about preserving the purity of the languauge, it is
 impossible to deny the fact that the Georian language has been actively increasing its vocabulary through
 the use of anglicisms which penetrated various styles and types of discourse (Megrelishvili et al. 2014).
      The distribution of anglicisms in Georgia is characteristic mainly of the urban speech, particularly of
 Tbilisi, the capital of the country, which has gained importance as an administrative, political, educational
 and cultural centre. A great deal of loan words, which have come to be borrowed to suit the needs of the
 society, can be categorised into two groups:
      a) neutral terms of different professional domains ranging from new technologies, business,
         science and politics to pop-music, sport, etc. to name new objects and concept, denoting
         rapid changes in the world in different spheres of life;
      b) fashionable anglicisms that are socially and culturally marked as prestigious lexical units, used by
         elite groups of the society (journalists, politicians, people of the artistic world, students, etc.) to
         highlight their modernity, urbanity and intellectual abilities.
 All the spheres of the distribution of anglicisms in Georgia are closely linked to mass-media and
 advertising, which has a very important role as far as language use is concerned. It is interesting that the
 media discourse influences the language of almost all social groups as it lost its bureaucratic character
 and became very varied, vivid, and emotional. These linguistic changes were affected by extralinguistic
 transformations, which were motivated by the pragmatic modification of values and meanings, as well
 as by the socio-cultural factors and contexts, assigning new meanings and connotations to the
 previously existing vocabulary.
      The adaptation of language to reality and its communicative needs, is very interesting due to the
 multidimensional character of the change lingual units undergo. Indeed, when studying language
 adaptations, we can observe social interests and current problems, and the interrelation of society with
 other cultures. Therefore, in order to understand linguistic change, it is essential to observe and analyse
 social, political, historical, and cultural transformations happening in the world synchronically as well as
 historically.
      Transformations of 21st century society brought an obvious tendency towards globalisation and
 standardisation (of business terms and practices, for instance). Linguistically, this trend is articulated in
 the form of lexical borrowing across the languages of the world with reference to various spheres of
 human activities. Linguists assume that our languages absorb the wisdom passed through the ages. This
 wisdom is presented through the ages in our languages through specific means of expression – set
 phrases, metaphorical and metonymic expressions, and realia, all of which, when read and studied in
 discourse, turn out to be a very reliable source of information about peoples’ traditions and their general
 perceptions of the world (Wierzbicka, 2006: 8).
                                                                                      Nino Kirvalidze     295


     Numerous anglicisms have appeared recently in modern Georgian discourse as foreign words
transferred directly to fill a semantic gap in those spheres of life which are undergoing the most
dynamic modification or development. However, changes at the lexical level demonstrate
transformations in native speakers’ worldview and can be used to examine cognitive patterns of the
culture in which these borrowed words and expressions appear (Munday, 2006: 56).
     Thus, the special nature of modern borrowing is that, together with the word, it brings into the
language the whole context (extralinguisitc situation) in which it is normally used. That is why
anglicisms possess a strong pragmatic core in their meaning. Obviously, the influx of anglicisms into
Georgian is happening not just to compensate for a lack in the language and to quickly create a
necessary word, but rather to transmit the meaning of ‘newness’ of the discussed object and ‘belonging’
to the globalized community, thus providing evidence of the reality of certain ‘shared understandings’
(Wierzbicka, 2006: 9).
     At the beginning of the 21st century it is possible to identify the following main spheres in the use
of anglicisms: economics and politics; technology; spheres of people’s everyday activities, often
pertaining to their senses of comfort and well-being; and the most recent category, the names of
various kinds of services. Economics and politics were the first spheres where English borrowings
appeared. It had to do obviously with the country’s attempt to switch from a planned to a market
economy, in order to adopt notions and strategies of democratic government procedures already
common in the rest of the world. Georgians adopted such words as governor (gubernatori), speaker
(spikeri), mayor (meri), impeachment (impiCmenti), summit (samiti); deposit (depoziti), collapse
(kolafsi), default (defolti), invoice (invoisi), etc.
     Though some of these borrowings have a corresponding equivalent in Georgian, the English terms
are widely used by the population, demonstrating social and political changes which have taken place in
the country. For example, the noun univermaRi (‘department store’) which clearly refers to a
description of Soviet times, has been replaced by the synonymous moli (‘mall’) and calque expression
savaWro centri (‘shopping centre’).
     Quick linguistic changes are prompted by changes in our modes of communicating during modern
dynamic times and can be explained first of all by the ‘economy principle’, which was formulated by the
French linguist Martinet in the 1960s. This principle underlines the idea of transference of a greater
volume of information in a smaller unit of time and is integral for a language’s further development.
The necessity for linguistic economy is caused by the compromise between efficient communication and
the constant human desire to invest as little effort in this process as possible.
     English terms usually have compact forms with broad conceptual meaning. For example, the
political term summit (samiti) is more frequently used than its Georgian equivalent which is represented
by the noun phrase, explaining the whole notion in a descriptive way: “a high profile international
meeting of political leaders” (Sexvedra umaRles doneze). Another example of a compact political term
is impeachment (impiCmenti), denoting a process in which an official is accused of unlawful activity, the
outcome of which may include the removal of that official from office as well as criminal or civil
punishment. This term successfully replaced the Georgian phrase, which explained the conceptual
meaning of impeachment in a verbose way.
     A number of anglicisms express concepts and objects, which already existed in our reality, but they
have acquired some specific and new features of a denoted thing. A lot of such words are found in the
group of job-titles. There is a very vivid example of the loan word manager (menejeri) which developed a
lot of new compounds, in which the first component marks the sphere of occupation: ofis-menejeri (office
manager), finansuri menejeri (financial manager), biznes-menejeri (business manager), brendis menejeri
(brand manager), kastingis menejeri (casting manager), etc.
     Most of the anglicisms which appear in everyday Georgian discourse these days tend to describe
such aspects of the life as health, beauty, and fashion. Such words as fitnesi (fitness), Seifingi (shaping),
ioga (yoga), bodi-bildingi (bodybuilding), bodi-bari (body-bar), spa (spa), velnesi (wellness), brendi
(brand), baieri (buyer), distributori (distributor), Sou-rumi (show-room), Sofingi (shopping), miqsi
(mix) and many others have become part of the vocabuary of modern Georgians. In the job market,
296      Linguo-Cultural and Pragmatic Peculiarities of the Phenomenon of Anglicisation in Georgia


which has become more varied along with other spheres of people’s lives, one can come across such
phrases as top-menejeri (top manager), aplikaciis forma (application form), ded-laini (dead-line),
etc.
     It should be noted that, although English borrowings are so widespread in the language that they
are not usually translated, their use depends upon a person’s age and educational level. Besides this,
communicative and linguistic competence, as well as international experience and psychological
readiness are the factors which determine a person’s willingness to include borrowings in everyday
use. The users of modern borrowings signal their belonging to a world without boundaries, their wish
to be a part of common problems and achievements. The component of ‘newness’ in anglicisms serves as
a marker of fashion, prestige, and ideological preference. As the below-given example shows, the
speaker chooses to use the English borrowing although there are other means of expression available in
the Georgian language:

         developeruli kompania “mgzavrebi” momxmarebels sTavazobs elitarul da stanadartul nomrebs
         mSenebare sastumroebSi bakuriansa da baTumSi (sityva da saqme, 06.12.2015). – (The
         Developer Company “Mgzavrebi” offers elite and standard apartaments in the hotels under
         construction in Bakuriani and Batumi.)

This advertisement demonstrates how the use of the anglicism developer (instead of the native word í
samSeneblo) transmits the feeling of something very prestigious and expensive highlighting that both
Bakuriani and Batumi are fashionable resort places in Georgia for well-to-do people.
     Obviously, the active process of borrowing new vocabulary stimulates an increase in synonyms –
lexical variants with a similar meaning, which nevertheless differ in terms of their stylistic,
connotational, and general pragmatic peculiarities. The words like brifingi (briefing), daijesti (digest),
egzitpoli (exit-poll), kastingi (casting), praimeri (primary) and many others reflect the reality and
help to describe it efficiently and economically. Modern borrowings which are very numerous in the
discourse of the 21st century have a very strong pragmatic reference, that is, the connotational emotional
meaning of modernity which expressions acquire in certain contexts. The English word show has become
a popular anglicism in Georgia, used in such word-combinations as Sou biznesi (show business), naiT Sou
(night show), realiTi Sou (reality show), komedi Sou (comedy show), feSen Sou (fashion show), politikuri
Sou (political show), Toq Sou (talk show), etc. Thus, it can be assumed that pragmatic and semantic
meanings of anglicisms are primarily intensified not by linguistic circumstances, but by extralinguistic
factors, which serve as the socio-cultural context for their use.


Conclusions

The research has shown that the phenomenon of anglicisation in Georgia is a multifaceted global process,
motivated by a number of socio-cultural and linguo-pragmatic factors. The growing influx of
English words into Georgian confirms that the country and its people respond to the changing needs of
communication, following changes in the world and ways of living. Nowadays English functions as a
lingua franca, and this certainly has more advantages than disadvantages (for instance, anglicisms
prevent the creation of new words through the language’s own means, thus hindering its further
development; or they may leave certain aspects of information unclear for the addressee due to the lack of
language proficiency of the latter). The most obvious advantages of anglicisms in Georgian are as
follows:
      1. they extend the vocabulary of the Georgian language, making it adaptable to the current use;
      2. their use testifies to people’s increased knowledge and interest about the world around them,
         promoting more intense English language teaching programmes;
      3. anglicisms acquaint the Georgian people with the Anglophone and world culture, at the same time
         making them aware of their own national and cultural identity through their own native language;
                                                                                        Nino Kirvalidze      297


     4. anglicisms are very flexible in their use and can be applied in thematically various discourses
        ranging from politics, business, new technologies and science to pop-music, sport, etc. to
        denote new objects and concepts in the respective spheres of life;
     5. anglicisms promote the use of the economy principle, transferring more information in a
        smaller unit of time;
     6. pragmatic and semantic meanings of anglicisms are primarily intensified not by linguistic
        circumstances, but by situational conditions, that is, extralinguistic factors, which serve as the
        socio-cultural context for their use.
Therefore, Georgia welcomes English as a lingua franca, as an international medium of communication
with the outside world, while it protects and promotes the Georgian language within the country as a
means of national identity and cultural heritage.


References

1.   Ahrens, Rüdiger, ed. (2003). European Language Policy. Heidelberg: Winter.
2.   Alexieva, Nevena (2008). How and Why are Anglicisms often Lexically Different from their English
     Etymons? In Fischer, Roswitha and Puáaczewska, Hanna (eds), Anglicisms in Europe: Linguistic Diversity in a
     Global Context. UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp.pp. 42-51.
3.   Crystal, David (2000). Language Death. UK: Cambridge University Press.
4.   Crytal, David (2003). English as a Global Language. UK: Cambridge University Press.
5.   Dunn, Hohn (2008). Face Control, Electronic Soap and the Four-Storey Cottage with a Jacuzzi: Anglicisation,
     Globalisation and the Creation of Linguistic Difference. In: Fischer, Roswitha and Puáaczewska, Hanna (eds),
     Anglicisms in Europe: Linguistic Diversity in a Global Context. UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,
     pp. 52-71.
6.   Görlach, Manfred (2001). A Dictionary of European Anglicisms. A Usage Dictionary of Anglicisms in Sixteen
     European Languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
7.   Görlach, Manfred (2002). An Annotated Bibliography of European Anglicisms. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.
8.   Humbley, John (2008). How to Determine the Success of French Language Policy on Anglicisms - Some
     Methodological Considerations. In: Fischer, Roswitha and Puáaczewska, Hanna (eds), Anglicisms in Europe:
     Linguistic Diversity in a Global Context. UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 85-105.
9.   Juaristi, Patxi, Timothy Reagan & Humphrey Tonkin (2008). Language Diversity in the European Union. An
     Overview. In: Xabier Arzoz, Xabier (ed.), Respecting Linguistic Diversity in the European Union.
     Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 47-72.
10. Maximova, Tamara (2006). Anglicisms in Russian Mass-Media Discourse. In: Proceedings of the International
    Conference Anglicisms in Europe. Regensburg University, 26-28 September 2006, pp. 12-13.
11. Megrelishvili, Madonna, Koba Lomidze & Maia Alavidze (2014). Adaptation and Integration of Anglicisms in
    Georgian in the Process of Globalization. Kutaisi State University Press, Georgia (in Georgian).
12. Munday, Jeremy (2006). Introducing Translation Studies: Theories and Applications. London / New York:
    Routledge.
13. ėrsi, Tibor (2008). The De-Anglicization of the Vocabulary of Informatics in French. In: Fischer, Roswitha
    and Puáaczewska, Hanna (eds), Anglicisms in Europe: Linguistic Diversity in a Global Context. UK:
    Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 208-221.
14. Oxford English Dictionary (1989) Oxford: Oxford University Press.
15. Wierzbicka, Anna (2006). English Meaning and Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
16. Winter-Froemel, Esme (2008). Unpleasant, Unnecessary, Unintelligible? Cognitive and Communicative
    Criteria for Evaluating Borrowings and Alternative Strategies. In Fischer, Roswitha and Puáaczewska, Hanna
    (eds), Anglicisms in Europe: Linguistic Diversity in a Global Context. UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,
    pp. 16-41.
