Chapter 1
Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish
case study
Ryan Bennetta , Jaye Padgetta , Grant McGuirea , Máire Ní
Chiosáinb & Jennifer Bellika
a University of California, Santa Cruz b University College Dublin

        Though a palatalized vs. velarized (slender vs. broad) contrast is fundamental to
        Goidelic languages of the Celtic family, contrasts involving either palatalization
        or velarization are typologically uncommon. Across languages, such contrasts are
        often dispreferred in onset compared to coda position, and in labial compared to
        coronal consonants. Previous phonetic research on both Russian and Irish has sug-
        gested that these asymmetries in contrast loss might be explained by, or at least
        correlated with, asymmetries in articulatory reduction and timing. We explore the
        timing of palatalization and velarization gestures in Irish stop consonants, and
        find differences between onset vs. coda position consistent with this general claim.
        However, we also find that gestural timing is structured in ways that allow for
        perceptual cues to the contrast to be recoverable, including in ways that might fa-
        cilitate perception of the contrast in codas and (possibly) in labial consonants. Put
        simply, gestural timing in Irish may be optimized to support vulnerable contrasts.



1 Introduction
The living Celtic languages are divided into two groups, a Goidelic branch (in-
cluding Irish and Scottish Gaelic) and a Brittonic branch (including Welsh and
Breton).1 In terms of phonological properties, an important feature distinguish-
ing Goidelic languages from Brittonic ones is a phonemic contrast between palatal-
ized and non-palatalized consonants, traditionally called slender and broad re-
spectively. Compare for example the Irish minimal pair brád /bˠrˠɔːdˠ/ ’drizzle’
  1
      For a recent discussion of the classification of Celtic languages, see Eska (2017).


Thanks to audiences at HISPhonCog and ICPhS in 2023, as well as Washington
University in St. Louis and the University of Connecticut, for feedback on
earlier versions of this work. We are also grateful to Nick Van Handel, and a
number of undergraduate research assistants, for helping us process the data
presented on here. This paper was improved by helpful comments from two
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


and bráid /bˠrˠɔːdʲ/ ’neck, throat’; the two words differ only in whether the
final consonant is palatalized or velarized. (These terms are explained below.)
This palatalization contrast developed in Proto/Old Irish (Greene 1973, McCone
1996, Stifter 2017), and it occurs also in Scottish Gaelic (Ternes 2006, Nance & Ó
Maolalaigh 2021) and Manx (Lewin 2019).
   Many phonemic contrasts are allowed only in certain phonological environ-
ments. For example, though English distinguishes voiced obstruents from voice-
less ones both word/syllable-initially and -finally (e.g. back vs. pack and cab vs.
cap, Russian prohibits the contrast finally, neutralizing in favor of the voiceless
series: compare [ˈlˠugˠə] ‘meadow (gen.)’ and [ˈlˠukˠə] ‘onion (gen.)’ (from
/lˠugˠ-a/ and /lˠukˠ-a/ respectively) to [lˠukˠ] ‘meadow’ and [lˠukˠ] ‘onion’
(from /lˠugˠ/ and /lˠukˠ/ respectively.
   It has long been understood that phonological alternations, including those
leading to the positional neutralization of contrast, might have historical origins
in phonetic processes, a hypothesis pursued most notably by Ohala (e.g. Ohala
1981, 1993b), but since explored by many. One way to test a hypothesis about
the phonetic origins of positional contrast and neutralization is to examine a
language that does not neutralize the relevant contrast, and look for potential
phonetic seeds of neutralization there. Indeed, we have done this for Irish (see
discussion further on). However, there is also much work showing that languages
can be structured in ways that militate against contrast loss, a view most notably
pursued by Lindblom (Lindblom 1986, 1990), but again explored since then by
many.
   In this paper we explore details of the timing of palatalization and velarization
gestures in Irish stop consonants, as a function of prosodic position (word/syllable-
initial vs. -final) and place of articulation (labial, coronal, dorsal). We find that
timing patterns vary more in word/syllable-final position, a fact that may help
explain the vulnerability of this contrast to loss in that position. However, we also
find evidence that timing in that position can be structured in ways that may fa-
cilitate perception of the palatalization contrast. As for place of articulation, we
find that patterns of timing in labial consonants, which are also vulnerable to loss
of a palatalization contrast are more consistent than for other places of articula-
tion; this may likewise facilitate perception of the palatalization contrast, though
here the facts are less conclusive. Overall our results suggest that gestural timing
in Irish may be optimized to support contrasts that are vulnerable.




2
                                     1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


2 Irish and the typology of contrastive palatalization
2.1 Palatalization and velarization
Palatalized (slender) consonants [Cʲ] are produced with a secondary high-front
tongue constriction, akin to the constriction for a palatal vowel [i] or glide [j],
which is roughly simultaneous with the primary constriction for that conso-
nant.2 Velarized (broad) consonants [Cˠ] are produced with a secondary tongue
body constriction which is high and back in the mouth, as for [ɯ u] or [ɰ w], or
sometimes in the mid-back or uvular region, as for [ɤ o] (International Phonetic
Association 1999, Kochetov 2002, Bennett et al. 2018, Shaw et al. 2021). In this arti-
cle the term ‘secondary articulation’ encompasses palatalization and velarization
as defined above.

2.2 The palatalization contrast in Irish
All consonants in Irish are contrastively palatalized or velarized. Table 1 illus-
trates these phonemic contrasts with the basic inventory of consonants in Con-
nacht Irish (or more specifically Connemara Irish), which here represents the
western dialect group (De Bhaldraithe 1975, Ó Siadhail 1991, Ní Chiosáin 1991,
1994, 1999, Ní Chiosáin & Padgett 2012). The specific phonetic form of palatal-
ized and velarized consonants varies somewhat across dialects (e.g. Ní Chasaide
1995, Hickey 2011), but all varieties of Irish share fundamentally the same inven-
tory of phonological contrasts illustrated in Tab. 1.
   As illustrated in Tab. 1, /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrasts are maintained across all places of
articulation in Irish. In addition, /Cʲ/ and /Cˠ/ can appear across all vowel con-
texts as well as word/syllable-initially and -finally (some examples given in Tab.
2, left). In the data analyzed in this paper, word-initial sounds are also syllable-
initial (and vice-versa), and word-final sounds are also syllable-final (and vice
versa). For ease of reference we will often use ”onset” to refer the former and
”coda” to refer to the latter.3
  2
    Since not all languages with a palatalization contrast are reported to oppose velarization to
    palatalization, we use ‘/C( ˠ) Cʲ/’ to refer to palatalization contrasts generally. We use capital
   ‘C’ to refer to any consonant, and capital ‘P’, ‘T’, ‘K’ to refer generically to labial, coronal, and
    dorsal consonants, respectively. Slash brackets ‘/ /’ indicate abstract phonemes, while square
    brackets ‘[ ]’ indicate surface phonetic forms. Transcriptions are broad: for example, coronal
    [dˠ dʲ] are phonetically closer to dentalized [d̪ˠ] and retracted [d̠ʲ] in e.g. Gaoth Dobhair Irish
    (Ní Chasaide 1995).
  3
    Consonant clusters typically agree in their secondary articulations in Irish (Ní Chiosáin 1991,
    1999). Such clusters may be palatalized (e.g. coirpeach [kˠirʲpʲəxˠ] ‘criminal’) or velarized (e.g.
    léargas [lʲeːrˠgˠəs] ‘insight’). So while word-internal codas may not have independent /Cˠ Cʲ/



                                                                                                      3
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik

            Table 1: Phonemic consonant inventory of Connemara Irish. Sounds in
            parentheses have highly restricted distributions.

                                   Labial     Coronal        Dorsal      Glottal
                        Stop        pˠ pʲ       tˠ tʲ         kˠ kʲ
                                    bˠ bʲ      dˠ dʲ          gˠ gʲ
                    Fricative       fˠ fʲ      sˠ sʲ          xˠ xʲ       hˠ (hʲ)
                                    vˠ vʲ                   (ɣˠ) (ɣʲ)
                      Nasal        mˠ mʲ        nˠ nʲ         ŋˠ ŋʲ
                      Liquid                     lˠ lʲ
                                                rˠ rʲ

            Table 2: Words showing distribution of /Cˠ Cʲ/ (left) and minimal pairs
            (right).

    caoin    [kˠiːnʲ]     ‘lament’                 pán        [pˠɔːnˠ]       ‘pawnshop’
    tiús     [tʲuːsˠ]     ‘thickness’              peann      [pʲɔːnˠ]       ‘pen’
    láib     [lˠɔːbʲ]     ‘mud, muck’              cat        [kˠatˠ]        ‘cat (sg.)’
    píob     [pʲiːbˠ]     ‘pipe (gen.pl.)’         cait       [kˠatʲ]        ‘cat (pl.)’


   The wide distribution of the /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrast across all of these contexts allows
for many minimal pairs (Tab. 2, right). It is also what makes the Irish language
a useful and important testing ground for phonetically-oriented explanations of
recurrent distributional restrictions on /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrasts across languages.

2.3 Typological asymmetries in palatalization contrasts
Though allophonic secondary palatalization is found in many languages (Bate-
man 2011), its contrastive use, as in Irish /bˠrˠɔːdˠ/ vs. /bˠrˠɔːdʲ/, is relatively
uncommon. Furthermore, among languages that do distinguish /C( ˠ) Cʲ/, the
contrast is not equally likely in all phonological environments (Takatori 1997,
Kochetov 2002, Iskarous & Kavitskaya 2018). First, such contrasts tend to be neu-
tralized or lost diachronically in codas, as in Bulgarian (e.g. Scatton 1993, Iskarous

     specifications, given that secondary articulations must assimilate in clusters, word-internal co-
     das may be either palatalized or velarized, just like word-final codas. (Compounds and prefixes
     allow disagreeing clusters, e.g. inphosta [inʲ-fˠoːsˠtˠə] ‘marriable’, fadtéarma [fˠadˠ-tʲeːrˠmˠə]
     ‘longterm’; Ní Chiosáin 1991: Ch.2.)
        The backness of short vowels is predictably determined by the secondary articulations of
     neighboring consonants, which is why we focus on long vowels in our discussion of vocalic
     contexts. See section 4.3 and Ní Chiosáin (1991), Ó Siadhail (1991) for details.



4
                                      1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


& Kavitskaya 2018) or Nenets (e.g. Kochetov 2002). As a result, the presence of
a /C( ˠ) Cʲ/contrast in coda position normally entails a corresponding contrast in
onset position (but not vice-versa).4 Second, /C( ˠ) Cʲ/contrasts tend to be neu-
tralized or lost diachronically in labial consonants compared to coronals. This
pattern occurs for example in Czech (Short 1993, Iskarous & Kavitskaya 2018).
These two restrictions may also interact, as in Belarusian, where palatalization
is contrastive for both labials and coronals in syllable onsets, but palatalized labi-
als do not occur in syllable codas (e.g. Bird & Litvin 2021).
   Some signs of these asymmetries are evident within Celtic. Scottish Gaelic may
have lost or be in the process of losing its palatalization contrast among labial
consonants, with remnants in the form of /Pj/ (labial consonant - glide) sequences
(Jackson 1967, De Búrca 1977, Ternes 2006, cf. Nance & Ó Maolalaigh 2021), as is
true in some Polish dialects (Czaplicki 2010, Iskarous & Kavitskaya 2018). The
same may have been true of Classical Manx (Lewin 2019). In Irish, there are
many fewer words ending in palatalized labial stops compared to palatalized
coronal stops, and the proportion of word-final labial stops that are palatalized is
low compared to the proportion of word-final coronal stops that are palatalized,
based on either a dictionary or corpus search of word types (Ní Chiosáin & Pad-
gett 2012). As Kochetov (2002) notes, discussing similar facts for Russian, such
asymmetries in frequency may reflect lexical attrition of contrasts in more vul-
nerable positions. They might in turn also enable further attrition of contrasts,
possibly leading to neutralization, since language learners will have to learn the
contrast based on fewer relevant lexical items.
   In spite of such asymmetries in segment frequency, Irish still maintains the
palatalization contrast in codas and in labials. For this reason, Irish is an ideal test-
ing ground for hypotheses about the phonetic bases of contrast and contrast neu-
tralization. For example, if contrasts are lost in certain contexts due to systematic
phonetic asymmetries, then we might expect to find such phonetic asymmetries
in Irish, even though it maintains the contrast. The hunt for phonetic precursors
to neutralization of a /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrast has precedents, including work of our own
(Kochetov 2002, 2005, 2006, Ní Chiosáin & Padgett 2012, Stoll 2017, Padgett & Ní
Chiosáin 2018, Iskarous & Kavitskaya 2018, Kirkham & Nance 2022, Padgett et al.
2023, Bennett et al. 2023). On the other hand, if languages are structured in ways
that support contrast, then we might expect to find ways in which this is true
  4
      Marginal exceptions to this typological generalization include Estonian and Romanian, in
      which phonological palatalization only occurs word-finally or before a consonant (i.e. only
      in coda position). These unusual distributions owe to contextual palatalization before /i/, ren-
      dered opaque by historical or synchronic vowel deletion (Operstein 2010, Chitoran 2013, Malmi
      et al. 2023).



                                                                                                    5
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


for the Irish palatalization contrast. The work presented here explores both of
these possibilities, focusing on the timing of palatalization and velarization with
respect to a primary place constriction. It develops ideas first presented by Pad-
gett et al. (2023). Here we bring new analyses to bear, including analyses of the
gestural trajectories of individual tokens and an exploration of individual subject
behavior. We develop the idea of perceptual optimization, and we consider and
reject an alternative understanding of gestural timing that relies on articulatory
principles along the lines of Sproat & Fujimura (1993) and Krakow (1999).


3 Gestural timing and contrast
3.1 Gestural organization and perception
Perceptual studies on Irish and Russian have found that listeners have more dif-
ficulty identifying or distinguishing /Cˠ Cʲ/ in coda position compared to onset
position, and for Russian, in labials compared to coronals. Kochetov (2002, 2004)
found that Russian listeners misidentified /pˠ pʲ tˠ tʲ/ more often in word/syllable-
final position than in initial position, even though the relevant consonant was
intervocalic due to a following vowel-initial word.5 In addition, listeners misiden-
tified /pʲ/ more often than the other three consonants in coda position, most of-
ten confusing it with /pˠ/. Ní Chiosáin & Padgett (2012), Padgett & Ní Chiosáin
(2018) found that Irish listeners discriminate /Cˠ Cʲ/ more poorly in coda posi-
tion compared to onset position, for a number of stop and fricative consonants.
(The codas in these stimuli were phrase-final.) As can be seen, these perceptual
asymmetries mirror the typological ones discussed earlier, raising the possibility
that the perceptual asymmetries explain the typology. In contexts where listeners
cannot perceive the /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrast well, we might expect attrition and eventual
loss of that contrast. We might also expect such perceptual asymmetries to have
some basis in productions that are weaker, more variable, etc.
   However, it’s possible that languages are structured to be perceptually opti-
mizing, in which case we might have a countervailing expectation: production
of a /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrast might vary by position (initial or final) or by place (labial
or coronal) in ways that support the contrast, specifically in vulnerable contexts.
This idea and the previous are not contradictory; rather, there is strong reason


    5
        There is no evidence that consonants resyllabify across words in Russian. For example, word-
        final consonants devoice even when vowel-initial words follow (See discussion in Padgett &
        Myers 2014). See earlier discussion in 4.3.



6
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


to believe both. Which factor prevails in a given case, leading to loss or preserva-
tion of a contrast, depends on many factors that are generally beyond our power
to predict.
   The idea that languages might be structured in ways that facilitate the mainte-
nance of phonological contrast goes back decades (e.g. Martinet 1952, 1964, Liljen-
crants & Lindblom 1972, Lindblom 1986, 1990). Most relevant here is work more
specifically suggesting that gestural timing can be organized in ways that are
perceptually optimizing. An important precedent is Kingston (1990), who argues
that across languages glottal articulations are ‘bound’ in time most often to the
release of stop consonants, because the burst characteristic of stops renders the
glottal gesture most perceptually effective. Sonorant and fricative consonants
lack bursts and so do not coordinate glottal articulations in the same way. Silver-
man (1997) argues in a similar way that laryngeal states creating phonation and
tone contrasts in vowels are timed in nuanced ways that facilitate their percep-
tibility, and Wright (1996) argues that place gestures in consonant clusters are
timed so as ensure recoverability of burst cues in consonants that lack internal
place cues or formant transitions. More generally, Kingston & Diehl (1994) ar-
gue that speakers systematically control articulations in ways that support the
perceptual distinctiveness of contrast, and there is a great deal of other evidence
that phonetic targets are ultimately auditory, not gestural. (For an overview and
arguments see Kingston 2019.)
   The above observations do not necessarily imply that speakers intentionally
structure their articulations to make their speech clear or intelligible for listen-
ers. While that could be the case, it is also plausible that articulatory patterns
which are easier to hear are also easier to learn, and therefore more likely to per-
sist over time (e.g. Ohala 1993a). Articulatory patterns which produce less robust
acoustic outcomes are more likely to be misheard by listeners: over time, such
misperceptions can lead to sound changes involving the collapse of contrasts (e.g.
Ohala 1981 and many others). In this way, perceptually-supportive articulatory
strategies can emerge organically, without any intent on the part of speakers.
That said, we remain open to the possibility that speakers do in fact strive to
produce clear, intelligible speech in at least some circumstances. In either case,
articulatory timing clearly plays an important role in the perceptibility of con-
trasts.

3.2 Gestural timing in palatalization contrasts
Previous work on the timing of secondary articulations in both Irish and Russian
suggests that the tongue body gesture associated with palatalization reaches its



                                                                                  7
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


target (or peaks) around the release of the primary place constriction for on-
set consonants (e.g. Ladefoged & Maddieson 1996: Ch.10, Kochetov 2002, 2006,
Iskarous & Kavitskaya 2010, Bennett et al. 2018, Padgett et al. 2023). More specifi-
cally for Irish, Bennett et al. (2018) find that tongue body fronting for palatalized
/Cʲ/ tends to peak at C release in both stops and fricatives. In contrast, velar-
ized /Cˠ/ does not show any clear, consistent asymmetries across timepoints: the
magnitude of dorsal backing tends to be comparable at the beginning of C con-
striction, C midpoint, and C release.
   Bennett et al. (2018) only examine consonants that are onsets (and prevocalic),
and so do not address the timing of secondary dorsal constrictions in codas (or
postvocalic position). However, based on an electromagnetic midsagittal artic-
ulometry (EMMA) study of four speakers, Kochetov (2006) found that Russian
/pʲ/ was produced differently in onset position compared to coda position. Ko-
chetov measured the lag between the achievement of the secondary and primary
articulations (defined in terms of velocity minima) of /pʲ/, as well as the lag be-
tween the release of the two gestures. For all speakers, in onset position both the
achievement and release of the palatalization gesture followed that of the labial
constriction by 5-55 ms on average (depending on the speaker). This is consis-
tent with our findings for Irish mentioned above. In coda position the relative
timing of the palatalization gesture with respect to the labial one was found to
be more variable by speaker, but it generally occurred earlier than in onset po-
sition. For example, the achievement of the palatalization gesture preceded that
of the labial gesture by 5-25 ms for three of the speakers, but followed it for the
fourth speaker. Biteeva (2021: 159-160) reports very similar findings for /tʲ/, based
on another EMMA study of nine speakers. Both studies characterize the relation-
ship between primary and secondary articulations as sequential for onsets and
more simultaneous for codas.

3.3 Gestural timing and perceptual consequences
It is worth considering the timing facts above in light of their effects on the pro-
duction of cues to palatalization. As Kochetov (2006) points out, it is perceptually
adaptive for the palatalization gesture of a stop to lag its primary place gesture in
onset consonants. There are two major cues to the palatalization status of a stop:
one is in the formant transitions between the consonant and a neighboring vowel
(primarily the second formant) and the other is in the quality of the consonant
burst, whose spectral properties are shaped by the presence of palatalization or
velarization. In onset consonants these distinct cues more or less coincide in time
at the release of the primary place gesture, indicated by the leftmost oval in Fig. 1.



8
                                     1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


Following the reasoning of Kingston (1990) for the timing of glottal articulations
with respect to stop consonants (discussed earlier), coordinating palatalization to
peak around this location maximizes its contrast potential. This fits well with the
general finding that onset consonant-vowel transitions are perceptually robust
(Fujimura et al. 1978, Ohala 1990, Steriade 2001, Wright 2004, Kochetov 2006).




            Figure 1: Waveform and spectrogram of the word píob /pʲiːbˠ/ (Con-
            nacht Speaker 1 repetition 1), showing location of major cues to Irish
            secondary articulations in onset (left oval) and coda (right two ovals)
            stops.

   Things are different for coda stops, where the two major cues to palataliza-
tion are split in time, as shown on the right of Fig. 1. The formant transition
cues to the contrast precede the stop closure (note the salient drop in the second
formant for /bˠ/), while the burst cues lie at the release of the stop constriction
(rightmost oval in the figure). If secondary articulations are timed to be percep-
tually optimizing, what should that entail for stops in final position? We do not
know enough about the perception of palatalization cues to answer this question
definitively. However, a reasonable first thought would be that gestures should
be coordinated in a way that facilitates the perception of both formant transi-
tions and burst properties. This would be true if the secondary articulation were
to be achieved at, or slightly before, the onset of the primary articulation and be
released at, or slight after, the release of the primary articulation. 6

  6
      The discussion here is oversimplified, since it ignores the larger phrasal context of the word
      in Fig. 1. We return to this issue in the paper’s discussion and conclusion.



                                                                                                  9
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


    As discussed in the last section, previous work on Russian has suggested that
the primary and secondary articulations of coda palatalized stops can be roughly
simultaneous, consistent with the above prediction, or that the palatalization ges-
ture slightly precedes the primary one, perhaps favoring the formant transition
cues. Roughly simultaneous coordination has also been found for Russian /lʲ/
(Kochetov 2005) and /sʲ/ (Kochetov 2009). In these studies, the sounds occurred
word/syllable-finally before a vowel-initial word. As Kochetov (2005) notes for
/lʲ/, these facts also seem consistent with the hypothesis about timing and percep-
tion: since these sounds have internal cues to palatalization (that is, the palatal-
ized state of the consonant is audible during the steady state portion of its pro-
duction), have no bursts, and would have formant transitions on both sides, we
have no reason to expect timing of the palatalization gesture to be coordinated
with either the beginning or end of the consonant in particular, regardless of
syllable position (see also Gick et al. 2006).7
    However, in the same phonetic context (coda before a vowel-initial word), Ko-
chetov (2009) found that the palatalization gesture of /tʲ/ was timed to coincide
more with the release of the primary coronal gesture. Assuming such a difference
turned out to be systematic, it might suggest that gestural timing is sensitive not
just to the presence but to the relative salience of phonetic cues. Ní Chiosáin &
Padgett (2012) report that Irish /tʲ dʲ/ differ more from /tˠ dˠ/, respectively, in
burst duration, intensity and center of gravity than /pʲ bʲ/ differ from /pˠ bˠ/. In-
deed, in both Irish and Russian the release of /tʲ dʲ/ is very salient, even sounding
somewhat affricated. In contrast, /pʲ bʲ/ differ more from /pˠ bˠ/, respectively, in
second formant values than /tʲ dʲ/ differ from /tˠ dˠ/, in both Irish and Russian
(Purcell 1979, Ní Chiosáin & Padgett 2012). These considerations might suggest
that, if the timing of secondary articulation gestures in coda consonants is to fa-
vor either the beginning or end of the primary gesture, it would be more adaptive
to favor the beginning in the case of labial stops and the end in the case of coro-
nal stops. However, it should be noted that Kochetov (2009) found coordination
with the end also in the case of Russian coda /nʲ/. This does not obviously sit well
with the above reasoning, and overall this remains fairly speculative given the
amount of available data.8
     7
       In this paper we may use the terms ’start’ and ’beginning’ interchangeably, both referring to
       the point in time when a stop closure is first achieved. The same is true of ’end’ and ’release’,
       but we often use ’release’ when the focus is on the acoustic and perceptual consequences of
       the end of consonant closure.
     8
       As noted above, Biteeva (2021) found roughly simultaneous coordination of primary and sec-
       ondary articulation in /tʲ/, unlike Kochetov. In Biteeva’s stimuli, the target coda preceded a
       word-initial coronal consonant, so that burst cues might have been less reliable, while in Ko-



10
                                   1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


3.4 Hypotheses
Though there is not a great deal of previous evidence to go on, what evidence
there is suggests that the relative timing of primary and secondary articulation
gestures in palatalization contrasts is more variable in the coda than in the onset,
by (and possibly within) subject and consonant type. We would therefore expect
to find such an onset-coda asymmetry in our Irish data.
    If the guiding principle is that gestural timing is perceptually adaptive, then
we expect both palatalization and velarization gestures to be aligned roughly
with the release of onset stops in Irish, since that is where all cues to the con-
trast can be maximized. As noted above, previous work on Irish and Russian
already leads us to expect this pattern for palatalized consonants. As for velariza-
tion, past work has not found any consistent tendency for /Cˠ/ gestures to align
with consonant release in onset position, as observed for /Cʲ/. Regardless of syl-
labic position, velarization seems fairly static over the duration of the consonant.
However, relevant data are limited.
    In the case of coda stops, where cues to the palatalization contrast are split
between the beginning and end of the primary place gesture, we have no gen-
eral reason to expect alignment specifically with release. Assuming both formant
transition and burst cues are important, we would expect primary and secondary
articulation gestures to be roughly simultaneous. Put differently, we might ex-
pect secondary articulation gestures to be achieved by the beginning of the con-
sonant and maintained through to the release.
    However, as discussed earlier, perhaps not all cues are equal in every context.
If formant transitions are more effective cues than burst properties are for labial
stops, then we might expect alignment of secondary articulations with the be-
ginning of coda labials, at the vowel-consonant transition. If the reverse is true
for coronal stops, we might expect alignment with the coda consonant release
instead. However, these latter predictions are somewhat speculative.


4 Ultrasound study
4.1 Methods
4.2 Participants
We recorded 7 native Irish speakers, whose language background corresponded
to each of the three major Irish dialect groups (Fig. 2). The shaded portions of
   chetov’s it was prevocalic. An interesting question for future work is whether such differences
   are systematic.



                                                                                               11
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


Figure 2 show the Gaeltachtaí –– areas where Irish is spoken as a community
language. It is conventional to distinguish three major dialect areas for Irish, that
of Ulster in the northwest, Connacht in the west, and Munster in the southwest.
Our study includes speakers from all three dialect areas, and we use these terms,
but it should be noted that there is dialectal diversity within each dialect area.

                                   Gaoth Dobhair
                                                    ULSTER
                                                        Belfast



                                         CONNACHT



                              Casla                    Dublin
                                           Galway



                        Baile na
                         nGall         MUNSTER
                                          Cork




        Figure 2: Officially recognized gaeltachtaí (Irish-speaking areas) in the
        Republic of Ireland, shaded in green (gaeltachtaí map data provided by
        https://data-osi.opendata.arcgis.com/, under CC by 4.0 license,
        https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


   We recorded two speakers of Ulster Irish (U1, 24, M; U2, 40, M), three of Con-
nacht Irish (C1, 42, F; C2, 50, F; C3, 43, F), and two of Munster Irish (M1, 34, M; M2,
56, M). (Mean age = 41, median = 43.) Recordings took place in Gaoth Dobhair,
Casla, and Baile na nGall, indicated on the map.
   All of our speakers were professional Irish-language broadcasters, working
for RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta, the Irish-language radio network of Raidió Teil-
ifís Éireann, Ireland’s national public service media system. Their jobs required
them to speak and read Irish throughout the workday. All were native speakers
of their respective dialects who were raised and currently live in the relevant
dialect area. Their parents were native speakers who spoke Irish to them, except
that one speaker’s father (C3) was a native English speaker who spoke both En-
glish and Irish to her, and another’s (M1) mother was a native English speaker
who spoke Irish to him. They attended primary and secondary school through
Irish in their respective dialect areas, though C1-3 and M1 used both English and
Irish in secondary school. All speakers attended third level colleges. All reported


12
                                    1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


reading Irish on a daily basis. None reported any difficulties in hearing, speaking,
or reading.
   As in Bennett et al. (2018), we chose to work with Irish-language broadcasters
for several reasons. First, even in traditional Irish-speaking communities (gaeltach-
taí), English has grown increasingly dominant, particularly among younger speak-
ers, as noted earlier. In this fragile sociolinguistic context, native speakers may
avoid interactions — such as experimental phonetic studies — in which they per-
ceive that their Irish is being evaluated. The speakers for this study represent
relatively traditional varieties of Irish, are comfortable with audio recording tech-
nology, and are accustomed to speaking while being recorded.
   Given the number of speakers of each dialect area, we cannot infer anything
firm about dialect differences based on our study, though the speakers clearly
showed expected properties of their dialects. (For example, the Ulster speakers
pronounced /tʲ dʲ/ as [t͡ɕ d͡ʑ] respectively.) A tentative investigation of inter-
speaker differences is provided in section 7.

4.3 Items
The materials were (mostly) monosyllabic words with a target stop consonant
controlled for secondary articulation (/Cʲ/ or /Cˠ/), place of articulation (labial,
coronal, dorsal), position (word-initial or -final) and adjacent vowel /iː uː ɔː/ (=
2 × 3 × 2 × 3 = 36 total conditions). There was one word per condition. The words
used are given in Tables 8 and 9 in the Appendix.
   We used long /iː uː ɔː/ for the vowel contexts because these vowels vary in
both backness — which is key to /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrasts in Irish — as well as height.
Short vowels cannot be used for this purpose, because non-low short vowels take
on the backness of a following consonant (Ní Chiosáin 1991, Ó Siadhail 1991): they
are predictably front before palatalized consonants (e.g. min [mʲinʲ] ‘grain’) and
back before velarized consonants (e.g. [mʲunˠ] ‘small’).
   In using all three of /iː uː ɔː/, this study expands on Bennett et al. (2018),
who only considered onset consonants preceding /iː uː/. Having said this, we
found substantial variation in the pronunciation of /ɔː/ depending on dialect,
speaker, context and word, particularly for the Ulster speakers, who had qualities
including [ɔ a ɑ ʌ ɛ]. The high vowels were more consistent, though we saw
some variation in the backness of /uː/ depending on the speaker and word. Due
to these and other unanticipated variations in vowel production, the conclusions
we can draw about vowel context effects are limited.9
  9
      In two forms the vowel context differed from the expected because of diphthongized pronun-
      ciations: [iːədˠ] for iad ‘them’ and [bˠuːɨkʲ] or [bˠuːɪkʲ] for buaic ‘pinnacle’.



                                                                                             13
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


   Since perfect control of materials would have made it impossible to use ac-
tual words, the target stops in our word list were either voiceless or voiced as
needed (e.g. tuí /tˠiː/ ‘straw’ vs. díon /dʲiːnˠ/ ‘roof’). For similar reasons, three
of our forms are disyllabic instead of monosyllabic, though in all cases the target
consonant was an onset/word-initial one in the stressed (initial) syllable (these
are píosa /pʲiːsˠə/ ‘piece’, púca /pˠuːkˠə/ ‘ghost’, and ciúnas /kʲu:nˠəsˠ/ ‘quiet
(noun)’). For one word, /bʲeːkʲ/ ‘shout’, with a final /kʲ/ target consonant, the
vowel context was /eː/ instead of /iː/. In the case of onset/word-initial conso-
nants, the nearest consonant (after the following vowel), if there was one, was a
velarized coronal (e.g. /dʲiːnˠ/ ‘roof’), except in the case of /pˠuːkˠə/ ‘ghost’. In
the case of coda/word-final target consonants, the nearest consonant (before the
preceding vowel) was more varied (see Table 9 in the Appendix), again to ensure
that actual words were used.
   Items were recorded in the context of the carrier sentence [ˈdˠuːrʲtʲ ˈiːfˠə ___-
əˈnˠʊrˠə] ‘Aoife said ___ last year’. This means that word-final target consonants
were positioned before a vowel-initial word, something that made segmentation
and labeling based on the acoustic signal easier. However it does raise the ques-
tion whether the relevant target consonants are actually syllable-final in these
sentences, as we assume they are. We do not believe that Irish has resyllabifi-
cation between lexical words: we refer the reader to arguments in Green (2001)
that resyllabification in Irish is possible only in the case of certain proclitics.10
Note also that Kochetov (2006)’s finding of different timing for word-final labi-
als compared to word-initial ones, discussed in section 3.2, was also based on
items placed in a carrier sentence before a vowel. As we will see, our own timing
results also show that final stops do not behave like initial ones.

4.4 Recording procedure
Recordings were done in RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta studios in Gaoth Dobhair
(Gweedore, Ulster), Casla (Costelloe, Connacht) and Baile na nGall (unofficially
Ballydavid, Munster). Speakers repeated the 36 experimental items five times
each in the frame sentence described above. All speakers read the words in the
same pseudo-random order.

4.4.1 Ultrasound and audio recording
We recorded midsagittal images of the tongue surface using a portable Terason
T3000 ultrasound system and model 8MC3 3-8MHz probe with a 90∘ field of
 10
      For discussion of Irish syllabification in general, see Ní Chiosáin (To appear).



14
                                     1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


view (using a depth setting of 10 and focal setting of 8, giving ≈ 46 fps, or 1 frame
every 22 ms), using the Ultraspeech software package (Hueber et al. 2008), which
automatically aligned the audio and video recordings. The probe was stabilized
and held in place with an Articulate Instruments ultrasound stabilization headset
(Wrench 2008, Scobbie et al. 2008). Simultaneous audio was recorded using a
Shure WH20 dynamic cardioid microphone attached to the headset, recording
directly to the ultrasound system (which included a laptop computer) at a 44.1
kHz sampling rate.11

4.5 Data annotation
4.5.1 Landmark identification and frame
Temporal landmarks for each consonant were annotated in Praat (Boersma &
Weenink 2020), on the basis of acoustic information present in the waveform
and spectrogram of the audio signal (see Turk et al. 2006). The beginning of C
closure was primarily identified by a drop in amplitude from the preceding vowel.
For onset stops, this vowel belonged to the preceding word in the frame sentence
(the proper name Aoife [ˈiːfˠə]). For coda stops, the preceding vowel belonged
to the same target word. Stop offsets were marked at the beginning of the stop
release burst. In cases of uncertainty the choice was generally made to err in
the direction of smaller consonant duration so as to minimize the possibility of
including vocalic information as part of the consonant.
   We extracted ultrasound frames for analysis at three different landmarks: stop
onset, stop release, and the midpoint between them. (These correspond to the
terms ‘C start’, ‘C end’, and ‘C midpoint’ used below.) These landmarks were
determined as described above (see also Fig. 1). Analyzing secondary articula-
tions at each of these three landmarks should provide us with at least a rough
measure of how those secondary articulations are timed relative to major articu-
latory events in the corresponding primary articulations of the same consonant.

4.5.2 Contour tracing
Mid-sagittal ultrasound images were traced using EdgeTrak software (Li et al.
2005). EdgeTrak produces contours consisting of 100 points per traced tongue
surface (Fig. 3), each with (X,Y) coordinates in Cartesian space.
   Some mid-sagittal images could not be traced due to issues with image qual-
ity. This led to imbalances in the number of tokens across speakers and places
  11
       The microphone failed for the Connacht recordings, and the laptop’s built-in microphone had
       to be used instead.



                                                                                               15
 Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik

                             Onset /Pʲ/ (=/pʲ/), /i/ context, C end                                Onset /Pʲ/ (=/pʲ/), /i/ context, C end, rep 1
                             Raw EdgeTrak tracings: Connacht     Speaker
                                                    Connacht, Speaker S1 1 Raw
                                                                           onset  /Pʲiː/tracings: Connacht, Speaker S1
                                                                               EdgeTrak
                      -0.2                                                                  -0.2
                                    1
                      -0.1          2                                                       -0.1
                                    3
                                    4
                      0.0           5                                                       0.0




                                                                      Height (normalized)
Height (normalized)




                      0.1                                                                   0.1

                      0.2                                                                   0.2

                      0.3                                                                   0.3

                      0.4                                                                   0.4

                      0.5                                                                   0.5

                      0.6                                                                   0.6

                      0.7                                                                   0.7
                             BACK                               FRONT                              BACK                              FRONT
                             0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                           0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                        Backness (normalized)                                                Backness (normalized)

                               Figure 3: Left: sample EdgeTrack tracings for 5 tokens of onset /Pʲiː/
                               at C end, Connacht Speaker 1. Right: example identification of dorsal
                               peak for one EdgeTrak tracing in this set (repetition 1).


 of articulation. For some speakers, all tokens at a particular place of articulation
 could not be traced reliably, usually because the tongue surface for that conso-
 nant type consistently moved outside of the region in which the tongue body
 could be confidently identified (i.e. outside of the field of view and/or depth of
 the image produced by our ultrasound probe). This most often occurred for dor-
 sal stops, and sometimes for coronal stops. More detailed information about the
 number of tokens traced per speaker are provided in Table 10 in the Appendix.

 4.6 Quantitative analysis
 4.6.1 Normalization
 In order to ensure that contour tracings were comparable across speakers, all
 tracings were range-normalized on a by-speaker basis. The X-coordinates were
 rescaled to the interval [0,1], and Y-coordinates were rescaled by the same pro-
 portion and similarly shifted to have a minimum value of 0 (see Fig. 3).

 4.6.2 Dorsal peak backness
 To assess the degree of velarization (= tongue body backing) and palatalization
 (= tongue body fronting) across contexts, we identified the X coordinate of the
 highest point of the tongue body in each contour (Fig. 3). The position of this X



 16
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


coordinate can then be used as a measure of the degree of fronting or backing of
the tongue body in a given context.
   In some tokens there was a plateau rather than a unique highest point for the
traced contour. In such cases the center of the plateau was selected as the ‘peak’
of the tongue body, and the X coordinate of that center point used as our measure
of tongue body fronting/backing.
   We visually inspected each raw tracing to ensure that the highest point of the
tongue contour was in a region which plausibly corresponded to the tongue body.
For one speaker’s coronal data (M2), the highest point of the tongue surface fell
on the tongue blade or tip, and not the tongue body; this data has been excluded
from the analysis of dorsal backness.
   Overall we examined the X position of the dorsal peak for 782 tokens in our
data. The data and R scripts used to carry out this analysis are available at https:
//github.com/rbennett24/articles/tree/master/Irish_pal_timing_syll_FACL.

4.6.3 Dependent measure: change in backness over time
Our primary research questions concern the timing of secondary articulations
in Irish. In our statistical analysis, we investigated differences in dorsal backness
at C end vs. C start, for each token in our data. To do this, we subtracted the
dorsal backness value at C start for each token from the corresponding value
at C end. This difference — dorsal backness at C end relative to C start, in each
token — is the dependent variable for our analysis. Values which are different
from zero indicate a difference in the magnitude of dorsal backing/fronting across
timepoints; if consistent across tokens, this would suggest that the secondary
articulation gestures for /Cˠ Cʲ/ peak at either C end or at C start, in a given
condition.
   Such skews can be taken as evidence for a particular pattern of gestural align-
ment between primary and secondary articulations. For example, if dorsal fronting
peaks at C end (= release) for /Cʲ/, we expect values of C end - C start to be pos-
itive for tokens of /Cʲ/, because the tongue should move forward over time. If
dorsal backing for /Cˠ/ also peaks at C release, we expect values of C end - C
start to be negative for /Cˠ/, since velarization involves backing the tongue body
rather than fronting it.
   Somewhat more succinctly: positive numbers mean the tongue body moves
forward over time during the consonant, while negative numbers mean it moves
backward. Consistent patterns of either type can be used as evidence for timing
relationships between primary and secondary articulations.




                                                                                 17
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


5 Results
Fig. 4 shows dorsal backness trajectories, from C start to C midpoint to C end,
for each token in our data. Certain tendencies are already apparent. For exam-
ple, the position of the tongue dorsum appears to be further front at C release,
compared to C start, for onset /Pʲ Tʲ Kʲ/, suggesting gestural alignment between
the secondary /Cʲ/ articulation and stop release. Similarly, the tongue dorsum is
further back at C release compared to C start for onset /Pˠ/. We also observe a
certain amount of variability in timing patterns across tokens in the same con-
dition. Some of this variability may owe to the influence of vowel context (e.g.
Bennett et al. 2023). Below we focus on other sources of variability.12
   To help interpret the values presented in Fig. 4 and subsequent figures, Tables 3
and 4 provide some summary statistics about the distribution of dorsal backness
values in our data. For example, a difference of 0.11 between start and end position
in Fig 4 would correspond to a difference of about one standard deviation for the
full set of backness values in our data (across all three of C start, midpoint and
end), or about 1/6 of the overall range of these values (Table 3). It would also be
about the same size as the difference in mean dorsal backness between velar /Kʲ/
vs. /Kˠ/ in onset position at C end in our data (Table 4). Figs. 3 and 5 are also
useful for visualizing these differences; see Table 5 for related statistical analysis.
             Table 3: Summary statistics for distributions of dorsal backness values
             in our data. sd = standard deviation, IQ range = inter-quartile range,
             Δ(X) = size of range for X.

 Mean          Median               Range       Δ(Range)         sd         IQ range       Δ(IQ range)
 0.5020         0.5080      [0.1356,0.7789]         0.643     0.108    [0.4266,0.5952]            0.173

   We statistically analyzed values of tongue body backness at C end (relative
to C start) using linear mixed-effects modeling in R (R Development Core Team
2020) with the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova et al. 2020; see also e.g. Pinheiro
& Bates 2000, Gelman & Hill 2006, Baayen et al. 2008, Bolker et al. 2009, Barr et
al. 2013, Matuschek et al. 2017, Tomaschek et al. 2018, Oberpriller et al. 2022). The
predictors Consonant Place, Secondary Articulation, Syllable Position,
and Vowel Context were sum-coded in order to reduce collinearity between
  12
       A point of clarification: for each token, the value at C end is relative to C start. As a consequence,
       the values at C end should not be interpreted as reflecting the overall degree of palatalization
       (fronting) or velarization (backing) in a given token. Instead, values at C end should be inter-
       preted as reflecting change in backness over time. (The same goes for values at C midpoint, of
       course, though we do not analyze that data here.) See Bennett et al. (2023) for an analysis of
       the strength of palatalization/velarization in this data.



18
                                        1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


            P               P                 T               T                K               K
            Cʲ              Cˠ               Cʲ               Cˠ               Cʲ              Cˠ
 0.3

 0.2

 0.1




                                                                                                          Onset
 0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3
 0.3

 0.2

 0.1




                                                                                                          Coda
 0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3
       Start Mid End   Start Mid End    Start Mid End    Start Mid End    Start Mid End   Start Mid End


          Figure 4: Trajectories for backness of dorsal peak over C start, mid-
          point, end timepoints, relative to values at C start. Grey lines represent
          trajectories for individual tokens, black lines represent loess-smoothed
          regressions over pooled values, with overlaid ribbon in blue showing
          confidence intervals around estimates of the mean.

          Table 4: Differences between mean backness values of /Cʲ/ - mean back-
          ness values of /Cˠ/ at C end, across places of articulation and syllable
          positions

       Syllable position               /Pʲ/ - /Pˠ/      /Tʲ/ - /Tˠ/      /Kʲ/ - /Kˠ/      Overall
                         Onset             0.166             0.206            0.100            0.163
                          Coda             0.132             0.190            0.079            0.134

simple predictors and higher-order interactions, and to help with model inter-
pretability. All two-way interactions between these predictors were included in
the initial model; we also included a three-way interaction between Consonant
Place, Secondary Articulation, and Syllable Position. The reference level
for Consonant Place was Labial; for Vowel Context it was /iː/; for Syllable
Position it was Onset; and for Secondary Articulation it was /Cʲ/.


                                                                                                              19
   Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


               Connacht  Speaker
                 Onset /P/,          1 onset
                             /i/context,     /Pʲiː/ vs. /Pˠiː/Coda
                                         C end                  (left) and
                                                                    /P/,     coda /iːPʲ/
                                                                          /i/context, C endvs. /iːPˠ/
                 Connacht, Speaker S1                (right)  Connacht, Speaker S1
                      -0.2                                                                  -0.2
                                    Pˠ (5)                                                                Pˠ (5)
                      -0.1          Pʲ (5)                                                  -0.1          Pʲ (5)

                      0.0                                                                   0.0




                                                                      Height (normalized)
Height (normalized)




                      0.1                                                                   0.1

                      0.2                                                                   0.2

                      0.3                                                                   0.3

                      0.4                                                                   0.4

                      0.5                                                                   0.5

                      0.6                                                                   0.6

                      0.7                                                                   0.7
                             BACK                               FRONT                              BACK                               FRONT
                             0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                           0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                        Backness (normalized)                                                 Backness (normalized)

                               Figure 5: Loess-smoothed curves for /Pʲ/ vs. /Pˠ/ in the context of /iː/,
                               in both onset (left) and coda (right) position. Connacht Speaker 1 (see
                               Fig. 3)


     A random effect for Speaker was included, along with by-speaker random
  slopes for Syllable Position. Models with additional by-speaker random slopes
  failed to converge, in part because of the unbalanced nature of our data (see
  Appendix). We did not include a random effect of Word because we only had
  one word per condition of interest. The specifications for the model are provided
  in (1).

            (1) Linear mixed-effects model specifications:
                             Dependent variable: Backness of dorsal peak at C end - C start ∼
                             Three-way (1):
                             C Place × Secondary Articulation + Secondary Articulation +
                             Two-way (6):
                             C Place × Syllable Position + C Place × V Context + C Place × Secondary
                             Articulation + V Context × Syllable Position + V Context × Secondary
                             Articulation + Secondary Articulation × Syllable Position +
                             Simple (4):
                             C Place + Syllable Position + V Context + Secondary Articulation +
                             Random effects:
                             (1+Syllable Position|Speaker)

     This model was fit with the parameter REML = False so that we could use
   the log-likelihood test to carry out model criticism and simplification. However,



   20
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


model criticism did not lead to the exclusion of any fixed-effect predictors (with
𝛼 = .05), starting with the highest-order (three-way) interaction term, and retain-
ing all simple predictors participating in interactions. As such, our final model
was the same as our initial model (1). The residuals appeared approximately
normally-distributed in the model. This model has only limited collinearity: the
maximum variance inflation factor (VIF) was 1.34, as reported by the check_-
collinearity() function in the performance package (Lüdecke et al. 2021).
VIF values below 5 are generally accepted to signal fairly low collinearity (e.g.
Tomaschek et al. 2018).
   The model results are provided in Table 5. The p-values we report were esti-
mated by the lmerTest package. We have enclosed certain significant (or near-
significant) predictors in boxes to highlight their relevance for the hypotheses
we consider here: namely, that the timing of secondary palatalization and/or ve-
larization gestures may be less stable in codas than in onsets, and less stable in
labials than in consonants at other places of articulation (especially coronals).




                                                                                21
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik

       Table 5: Linear mixed-effects model parameters for analysis of dorsal
       backness trajectories (values at C end, relative to C start).

        Predictor              Estimate                       SE         p
        (Intercept)                0.0054                 0.0049        .31
        C place                                                    < .001*
        Coronal                    0.0099                 0.0031    < .01*
        Dorsal                     0.0144                 0.0034   < .001*
        Syllable position                                            < .46
        Coda                      -0.0051                 0.0065        .46
         Secondary articulation                                    < .001*
        /Cˠ/                      -0.0207                 0.0020   < .001*
        V context                                                  < .001*
        /uː/                       0.0023                 0.0028        .43
        /ɔː/                       0.0150                 0.0028   < .001*
         C place × Syllable position                                < .075
        Coronal:Coda               0.0072                 0.0032    < .05*
        Dorsal:Coda               -0.0058                 0.0034        .09
         Secondary articulation × C place                           < .01*
        /Cˠ/:Coronal              -0.0067                 0.0029    < .05*
        /Cˠ/:Dorsal                0.0099                 0.0031    < .01*
         Secondary articulation × Syllable position                < .001*
        /Cˠ/:Coda                  0.0141                 0.0020   < .001*
        C place × V context                                        < .001*
        Coronal:/uː/              -0.0138                 0.0041   < .001*
        Dorsal:/uː/               -0.0018                 0.0044        .69
        Coronal:/ɔː/               0.0078                 0.0040        .05
        Dorsal:/ɔː/                0.0062                 0.0043        .15
        V context × Syllable position                              < .001*
        /uː/:Coda                  0.0012                 0.0027        .64
        /ɔː/:Coda                  0.0234                 0.0026   < .001*
        Secondary Articulation × V context                          < .01*
        /Cˠ/:/uː/                  0.0009                 0.0026        .74
        /Cˠ/:/ɔː/                  0.0067                 0.0026    < .05*
        Secondary articulation × C place × Syllable Position        < .01*
        /Cˠ/:Coda:Coronal        -0.0049                  0.0029        .09
        /Cˠ/:Coda:Dorsal         -0.0041                  0.0031        .18
        Range of values: [-0.2870, 0.2858] (Δ = 0.573)
        Mean = 0.0003, median = 0, sd = 0.0716
        Reference levels: labial, /Cʲ/, onset, /iː/

22
                                      1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


   While the results in Table 5 imply that gestural alignment may be influenced
by a number of factors, the precise patterns of alignment indicated by these re-
sults are a bit difficult to interpret, given the various overlapping interactions
and main effects. Still, certain patterns do seem apparent. For example, while
velarized /Cˠ/ shows evidence of backing at C end, relative to C start (negative
estimate for /Cˠ/), this tendency is much weaker in coda position (roughly com-
parable positive effect for Coda × /Cˠ/). This suggests that velarized consonants
may tend toward release alignment in onsets, but not in codas (or at least, not as
strongly in codas).
   However, the significant effects of Dorsal × /Cˠ/, Coronal × /Cˠ/, and Coro-
nal × Coda suggest that these tendencies may vary depending on place of ar-
ticulation — in particular, labial /Pˠ/ may be driving most of the onset vs. coda
asymmetries for velarized /Cˠ/, as implied by Fig. 4. At a minimum, it seems
that consonant place, secondary articulation, and syllable position play
some role in determining patterns of gestural alignment in our data.
   To clarify the structure of our results, Fig. 6 plots the distributions of back-
ness values, relative to C start, for all combinations of consonant place, sec-
ondary articulation, and syllable position in our data. (We abstract away
from vowel context because it is not related to the specific hypotheses we focus
on here.) For each cell, we assessed whether the distribution of dorsal backness
at C end was significantly different from zero (i.e. different from C start, since C
start was subtracted from all timepoints for each token). This was determined by
t-tests with conservative Bonferroni-corrected significance values of 𝛼 = .05/12 =
.0041. Distributions which are significantly different from zero in Fig. 6 indicate
patterns of gestural timing in which dorsal backness for secondary articulations
peaks at either C end or C start (note that we do not analyze midpoint values at
all here).13 We label such distributions with Rel for ‘alignment with C release’ (=
C end), and VC for ‘alignment with VC transition in coda position’ (= C start in
coda position). These are the only two patterns of alignment that our statistical
analysis uncovered.
   Fig. 6 shows that there are clear asymmetries across conditions with respect
to the timing of dorsal gestures for /Cˠ Cʲ/. In onset position, the dorsal fronting
gesture for /Cʲ/ peaks at C release; this is consistent across labial, coronal, and
dorsal places of articulation (see Fig. 8 below for a visual illustration with onset
/Pʲuː/). Additionally, velarized labial /Pˠ/ also shows release alignment in onset
position. Velarized /Tˠ Kˠ/ show no particular pattern of alignment in onset
position in this data.
 13
      The significant results labeled in Fig. 6 remain the same if significance is assessed using the
      bootstrap estimation method described in section 7 rather than t-tests.



                                                                                                  23
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


                P              P               T              T                K              K
                Cʲ             Cˠ              Cʲ             Cˠ               Cʲ             Cˠ
 0.3
          Rel            Rel             Rel                             Rel
 0.2

 0.1




                                                                                                         Onset
 0.0

 -0.1

 -0.2

 -0.3
  0.3
          VC             Rel             Rel
 0.2

 0.1




                                                                                                         Coda
 0.0

 -0.1

 -0.2

 -0.3
         Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End


             Figure 6: Values for backness of dorsal peak over C start, midpoint,
             end timepoints, relative to values at C start. Black lines connect mean
             values of distributions at each timepoint. Boxed text labels indicate sta-
             tistically significant patterns of alignment in a given condition: ‘Rel’
             indicates that alignment of the secondary articulation peaks at C re-
             lease, and ‘VC’ indicates that alignment of the secondary articulation
             peaks at the VC transition in coda position.


   In coda position, timing patterns are more varied. Coda /Pʲ/ shows VC align-
ment, while coda /Pˠ/ shows release alignment.14 We illustrate this difference
with a pair of examples from Ulster Speaker 1’s data in Fig. 7.
   Both /Pˠ/ and /Pʲ/ show backing over time in coda position after /ɔ:/ in Fig.
7, indicating an increase in velarization over time, but a decrease in palatalization.
This reflects different timing patterns for coda /Pˠ Pʲ/: release alignment for coda
/Pˠ/, and VC alignment for coda /Pʲ/.
  14
       It’s important to remember that negative values at C end mean different things for /Cʲ/ vs.
       /Cˠ/. Negative values at C end indicate dorsal backing relative to C start: this implies stronger
       velarization over time, but weaker palatalization. So while the distributions of coda /Pʲ/ and
       /Pˠ/ are similar in Fig. 6, they reflect different alignment patterns: release alignment for /Pˠ/
       (stronger backing over time), and VC alignment for /Pʲ/ (weaker fronting over time).



24
                                                                 1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study

                             Coda /Pˠ/, /ɔː/ context                                                    Coda /Pʲ/, /ɔː/ context
         Ulster      Speaker S11 onset /Pʲuː/
                  Speaker
             Ulster,                                                                                    Ulster Speaker 1 coda /ɔːPʲ/
                                                                                                        Ulster, Speaker S1
                      -0.2                                                                       -0.2start (5)                                        start (5)
                                                                                                       midpoint (5)                                   midpoint (5)
                      -0.1                                                                       -0.1end (5)                                          end (5)
                      0.0                                                                        0.0




                                                                           Height (normalized)
Height (normalized)




                      0.1                                                                        0.1

                      0.2                                                                        0.2

                      0.3                                                                        0.3

                      0.4                                                                        0.4

                      0.5                                                                        0.5

                      0.6                                                                        0.6

                      0.7                                                                        0.7
                             BACK                            FRONT                                     BACK                             FRONT
                             0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                                0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                      Backness (normalized)                                                       Backness (normalized)


                               Figure 7: Loess curves for Ulster Speaker 1’s coda /ɔːPˠ/ and /ɔːPʲ/
                               data showing change over time. The solid black line corresponds to C
                               start, the short-dashed yellow line to C midpoint, and the long-dashed
                               blue line to C end.


   Coda /Tʲ/ also shows release alignment in Fig. 6, while the dorsal gesture for
coda /Tˠ Kʲ Kˠ/ do not appear to show any particular alignment pattern at all.
   Some of these results are also evident in the model output in Table 5. For exam-
ple, the positive estimate for /Cˠ/ × Dorsal is consistent with the observation
that coda labial /Pˠ/ (the reference level for C place) shows release alignment
(negative values) across syllable positions, while dorsal /Kˠ/ shows values cen-
tered around zero for both onset and coda contexts.
   The significant trends in Fig. 6 are readily apparent from visual inspection
of our raw tracings and corresponding loess-smoothed curves like Fig. 7.15 For
example, Fig. 8 confirms that the tongue body in onset /Pʲuː/ tends to be raised
and/or fronted at C release (C end) relative to C start for most speakers. The
degree of fronting involved varies — it is clearest for Connacht Speaker 2, and
the Ulster speakers — but the overall pattern appears to hold for 5/7 participants
(Connacht Speakers 1 and 3 being apparent exceptions).
   Fig. 9 provides a side-by-side comparison of raw tracings for Munster Speaker
1’s onset /Pʲuː/ productions at C start and C release (C end). We note that (i) this
speaker’s productions are fairly consistent from token-to-token, and (ii) there is
clear raising and fronting of the tongue body at C start relative to C end, despite
the fact that the following vowel is back /uː/ (CV coarticulation for backness is
limited in Irish; Ní Chasaide & Fealy 1991, Bennett et al. 2018, 2023).
       15
                The full set of raw tracings and loess curves discussed in this section is available at https:
                //github.com/rbennett24/articles/tree/master/Irish_pal_timing_syll_FACL.



                                                                                                                                                          25
  Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik

                             Onset /Pʲ/, /uː/ context
                             By dialect and speaker Onset /Pʲuː/, all speakers

                                                   Connacht                         Connacht                                         Connacht                      Munster
                                                      S1                               S2                                               S3                           S1
                      -0.1
                       0.0
                       0.1
                       0.2
                       0.3
                       0.4
                       0.5
                       0.6
                       0.7
Height (normalized)




                                  BACK FRONT BACK FRONT BACK FRONT BACK FRONT
                                                                                                                                                             0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                     Munster                            Ulster                                          Ulster
                                                       S2                                S1                                              S2                              start
                      -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                         midpoint
                       0.0                                                                                                                                               end
                       0.1
                       0.2
                       0.3
                       0.4
                       0.5
                       0.6
                       0.7
                                  BACK FRONT BACK FRONT BACK FRONT
                             0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                                                              Backness (normalized)

                                           Figure 8: Loess-smoothed ultrasound tracings for every speaker’s
                                           /Pʲuː/ tokens at C start, midpoint, and end.

                                                                         Munster Speaker 1 onset /Pʲuː/
                                                          Onset /Pʲ/ (=/bʲ/), /u/ context, C start
                                                                                             Onset /Pʲ/ (=/bʲ/), /u/ context, C end
                                                                     C start                 Raw EdgeTrakC
                                                          Raw EdgeTrak tracings: Munster, Speaker S1        endMunster, Speaker S1
                                                                                                         tracings:
                                                   -0.2                                                                          1
                                                                                                                              -0.2                                                  1
                                                                                                                                2                                                   2
                                                   -0.1                                                                          3
                                                                                                                              -0.1                                                  3
                                                                                                                                4                                                   4
                                                                                                                                5                                                   5
                                                   0.0                                                                        0.0
                             Height (normalized)




                                                                                                        Height (normalized)




                                                   0.1                                                                        0.1

                                                   0.2                                                                        0.2

                                                   0.3                                                                        0.3

                                                   0.4                                                                        0.4

                                                   0.5                                                                        0.5

                                                   0.6                                                                        0.6

                                                   0.7                                                                        0.7
                                                          BACK                               FRONT                                   BACK                              FRONT
                                                          0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                                0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                                     Backness (normalized)                                                     Backness (normalized)



                                           Figure 9: Raw ultrasound tracings for Munster Speaker 1’s onset /Pʲuː/
                                           tokens at C start (left) and end (right).




  26
                                     1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


   We conclude that the significant results in in Fig. 6 are reflected in qualitative
patterns as well as quantitative ones.
   The non-significant results in Fig. 6 must be interpreted with caution, for two
reasons. First, in frequentist statistics it is not generally valid to draw conclu-
sions from the lack of a statistically-significant effect (this is sometimes called
‘accepting the null hypothesis’; Frick 1995 and many others).16
   The second issue of interpretation surrounding Fig. 6 is that a non-significant
effect could correspond to two different scenarios regarding articulatory timing.
First, it could be that backness values at C start are comparable to those at C
end because the secondary articulation reaches its peak at C start, and is then
maintained more or less constant until C end. In this scenario, we expect a fairly
tight cluster of points around zero at C end in Fig. 6, since the position of the
tongue body should be more-or-less the same, consistently, at C start vs. C end.
   Alternatively, it could be that articulatory timing is more noisy and variable:
sometimes the secondary articulation peaks at C start, sometimes at C end, and
sometimes in-between. In this scenario, we might expect a looser grouping of
points around zero at C end. This is because differences in dorsal position at
C end, relative to C start, would be less stable than in a scenario in which the
secondary articulation peaks at C start and is held till C end.17
   To try to disentangle these two interpretations, we can first consider some
qualitative patterns in our data. Fig. 10 provides loess-smoothed ultrasound trac-
ings for coda /Tˠ/ following /iː/ for one speaker (U2), at C start, midpoint, and
end. We’ve chosen this context as an example because (i) coda /VTˠ/ is one of the
non-significant conditions in Fig. 6, and (ii) some of our other work on Irish sug-
gests that velarized /Cˠ/ is often significantly fronted after /iː/ in coda position
  16
     In principle, Bayesian modeling can be used to justify acceptance of a null hypothesis (e.g.
     Kruschke 2013). However, in the specific case at hand, nothing is gained on this front by
     using Bayesian rather than frequentist statistics. Bayesian t-tests, implemented using the
     ttestBF() function in the BayesFactor package and the describe_posterior() function in
     the bayestestR package in R (Morey & Rouder 2023, Makowski et al. 2019), suggest that there
     is indeed sufficient evidence to accept the significant effects labeled in Fig. 6. For the remain-
     ing conditions, the Bayesian t-tests suggest that the evidence is insufficient to either accept
     or reject the null hypothesis of no difference. When it comes to drawing inferences about the
     distributions in Fig. 6, Bayesian methods leave us in the same place as regular frequentist ones.
  17
     A third scenario, which we reject, is that the peak of the secondary articulation varies categor-
     ically between C start and C end for those conditions which lack a significant skew away from
     zero. In this scenario we would expect to find a bimodal distribution of points on either side
     of zero, with one peak for tokens showing clear C start alignment, and another peak, on the
     opposite side of zero, for tokens showing clear C end alignment. However, the distributions in
     Fig. 6 appear to be consistently unimodal across conditions and timepoints, and so we reject
     this possibility. See also Padgett et al. (2023), who use Hartigan’s dip test to argue that all of
     the distributions in Fig. 6 are unimodal.


                                                                                                   27
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


(Bennett et al. 2023). Coda /iːTˠ/ is thus a condition in which we might expect to
find greater backing at C end than C start, where influence from the vowel /iː/
could pull the consonant articulation for /Tˠ/ forward at the VC transition.
                 Coda /Tˠ/, /i/ context
                           Speaker S2Speaker 2 coda /iːTˠ/
                 Connacht,Connacht
                              -0.2                                                 start (4)
                                                                                   midpoint (4)
                              -0.1                                                 end (4)
                              0.0
        Height (normalized)




                              0.1

                              0.2

                              0.3

                              0.4

                              0.5

                              0.6

                              0.7
                                     BACK                            FRONT
                                     0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                              Backness (normalized)

        Figure 10: Loess-smoothed ultrasound tracings for Connacht Speaker
        2’s /iːTˠ/ tokens at C start, midpoint, and end.

   As is evident from Fig. 10, tongue body position and posture are very similar
across timepoints. There is perhaps a slight lowering of the tongue body at C
end and midpoint relative to C start, but otherwise, very few differences when
comparing these three landmarks. This implies that the constriction for /Tˠ/ is
already achieved by the beginning of the consonant in /iːTˠ/ for this speaker.
   Loess-smoothed curves are a kind of average, which could potentially hide
some informative variability across tokens. However, we can also see from Fig.
11 that there is little variability in tongue body position across tokens at either C
start or C end. This too is consistent with the claim that the constriction for /Tˠ/
is achieved at the VC transition (C start) and maintained basically constant until
C release (C end).
   Visual inspection of raw tracings and loess curves suggests that, generally
speaking, the non-significant conditions in Fig. 6 resemble Figures 10 and 11:
tongue body position is more or less the same at C start as at C end.
   There are two interesting exceptions to this generalization. First, coda /Cˠ/ is
sometimes realized with a fronter (less velarized) dorsal constriction at C start
than at C end when following /i:/ (Fig. 12). This reflects coarticulation for back-
ness between /i:/ and a following /Cˠ/.


28
                                                                 1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


                                                    Connacht Speaker 2 coda /iːTˠ/
                                    Coda /Tˠ/ (=/dˠ/), /i/ context, C start
                                                                        Coda /Tˠ/ (=/dˠ/), /i/ context, C end
                                                C start                 Raw EdgeTrakC
                                    Raw EdgeTrak tracings: Connacht, Speaker S2        endConnacht, Speaker S2
                                                                                    tracings:
                            -0.2                                                                         -0.21                                                  1
                                                                                                            2                                                   2
                            -0.1                                                                         -0.14                                                  4
                                                                                                            5                                                   5
                            0.0                                                                          0.0
      Height (normalized)




                                                                                   Height (normalized)
                            0.1                                                                          0.1

                            0.2                                                                          0.2

                            0.3                                                                          0.3

                            0.4                                                                          0.4

                            0.5                                                                          0.5

                            0.6                                                                          0.6

                            0.7                                                                          0.7
                                    BACK                               FRONT                                     BACK                              FRONT
                                     0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0                                 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                               Backness (normalized)                                                       Backness (normalized)


                     Figure 11: Raw ultrasound tracings for Connacht Speaker 2’s coda
                     /iːTˠ/ tokens at C start (left) and end (right).
                                           Coda /Kˠ/, /iː/ context
                                                    Speaker S2 Speaker 2 coda /iːKˠ/
                                           Connacht,Connacht
                                    -0.2                                                                                                 start (4)
                                                                                                                                         midpoint (4)
                                    -0.1                                                                                                 end (4)
                                    0.0
              Height (normalized)




                                    0.1

                                    0.2

                                    0.3

                                    0.4

                                    0.5

                                    0.6

                                    0.7
                                           BACK                                                 FRONT
                                           0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                       Backness (normalized)

                     Figure 12: Loess-smoothed ultrasound tracings for Connacht Speaker
                     2’s /iːKˠ/ tokens at C start, midpoint, and end.


   At the VC transition, /Cˠ/ is fronter than at /Cˠ/ release, where the influence
of the /i:/ is more removed. This is consistent with Bennett et al.’s (2023) find-
ing that /iːCˠ/ is the context in which consonant backness is most affected by
coarticulation with a neighboring vowel in this dataset:
   Second, in some conditions, some speakers appear to transition towards a
more neutral tongue body position at the end of coda C. For example, Fig. 13


                                                                                                                                                               29
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


shows that Ulster Speaker 2 has a fronter tongue body at C end than at C start in
coda /uːKˠ/. Both the vowel and consonant are back in this context, so fronting
is not motivated by the segments themselves.
              Coda /Kˠ/, /uː/ context
              Ulster, Speaker S2 Speaker 2 coda /uːKˠ/
                          Ulster
                             -0.2                                                 start (5)
                                                                                  midpoint (5)
                             -0.1                                                 end (5)
                             0.0
       Height (normalized)




                             0.1

                             0.2

                             0.3

                             0.4

                             0.5

                             0.6

                             0.7
                                    BACK                            FRONT
                                    0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                             Backness (normalized)

          Figure 13: Loess-smoothed ultrasound tracings for Ulster Speaker 2’s
          /uːKˠ/ tokens at C start, midpoint, and end.

   Our target words were produced in a frame sentence (section 4.3), which means
that each target word was followed by the word [əˈnˠʊrˠə] ‘last year’. The fronting
observed in 13 could reflect anticipatory coarticulation with the upcoming [ə] in
[əˈnˠʊrˠə]. Alternatively, it could correspond to a phrase-final tongue posture of
some kind, since our target words were generally produced with focus prosody,
and so may have been prosodically phrase-final. (See e.g. Gick et al. 2004, Katsika
2016 for related discussion.)
   Taking these observations together, our overall conclusion is that the non-
significant conditions in Fig. 6 generally represent a production pattern in which
the secondary articulation is achieved at the VC transition (C start) and held more
or less consonant through C release (C end). That said, we recognize that other
factors (e.g. coarticulation) may play a role as well.
   Further support for this interpretation comes from a more quantitative inter-
pretation of the patterns in Fig. 6. Our statistical question concerns the spread of
the distributions in Fig. 6: in cases where backness values at C end overlap with
those at C start, are the distributions at C end tightly clustered (≈ alignment at
C start, continued to C end) or more widely spread out (≈ variable alignment)?



30
                                 1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


   To answer this question, we can compare the variability in our non-significant
conditions to the variability in conditions where we believe there is a specific,
consistent pattern of gestural alignment. Table 6 reports summary statistics, in-
cluding standard deviations and inter-quartile ranges, at C endpoint for each of
the 12 conditions shown in Fig. 6.
        Table 6: Summary statistics for distributions shown at C endpoint in
        Fig. 6. Starred rows indicate conditions with statistically significant
        differences from zero in Fig. 6. sd = standard deviation, IQ range =
        inter-quartile range, Δ(X) = size of range for X.

               Mean            Range      Δ(Range)     sd       IQ range      Δ(IQ range)
   *Onset Pʲ    0.017   [-0.194,0.272]       0.466   0.049       [0,0.036]          0.036
  *Onset Pˠ    -0.031   [-0.287,0.061]       0.348   0.050      [-0.056,0]          0.056
  *Onset Tʲ    0.038    [-0.045,0.286]       0.331   0.058       [0,0.062]          0.062
    Onset Tˠ   -0.004   [-0.204,0.095]       0.299   0.041   [-0.011,0.004]         0.015
  *Onset Kʲ    0.027    [-0.159,0.204]       0.364   0.049       [0,0.052]          0.052
    Onset Kˠ    0.010   [-0.082,0.132]       0.214   0.032       [0,0.024]          0.024
    *Coda Pʲ   -0.011   [-0.153,0.133]       0.286   0.042   [-0.027,0.004]         0.031
    *Coda Pˠ   -0.011      [-0.228,0.2]      0.428   0.051       [-0.027,0]         0.027
    *Coda Tʲ    0.019    [-0.07,0.183]       0.253   0.040       [0,0.033]          0.033
    Coda Tˠ    -0.002   [-0.138,0.154]       0.292   0.044   [-0.016,0.003]         0.019
     Coda Kʲ    0.005    [-0.09,0.131]       0.221   0.040   [-0.012,0.026]         0.038
    Coda Kˠ     0.002   [-0.092,0.181]       0.273   0.048   [-0.021,0.002]         0.022

   As benchmarks, we can consider the three conditions with the largest devia-
tions from zero, as determined by the absolute value of the mean. These are boxed
and in bold in Table 6: they are onset /Pˠ Tʲ Kʲ/. These three conditions are the
clearest examples of consistent articulatory alignment in our dataset, with sec-
ondary articulations seeming to peak at C end (= release) for all three conditions.
   If we compare the measures of variance for the non-significant conditions in
Fig. 6 and Table 6, we see that those measures are similar in size to the measures
of variance in our three significant benchmark conditions. For example, the mean
of onset /Tˠ/ (-0.004) is not significantly different from zero. The measures of
dispersion for this condition — sd = 0.041, ΔRange = 0.299, and ΔIQ Range =
0.015 — are in fact smaller than the same measures for all three of our benchmark
significant conditions (onset /Pˠ Tʲ Kʲ/). This suggests that the values for onset
/Tˠ/ are at least as tightly clustered as the values for our significant benchmarks.
The same general point can be made for all the non-significant conditions in Fig.



                                                                                        31
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


6 and Table 6: the dispersion around the mean appears to be basically the same,
and sometimes smaller, than found for the significant conditions demonstrating
specific patterns of articulatory alignment. This is also consistent with simple
visual inspection of the distributions in Fig. 6.18
   We conclude that the distributions for the non-significant conditions in Fig. 6
and Table 6 are not particularly loose or spread-out around zero. Instead, they
appear to be about as tightly clustered as the distributions in our significant con-
ditions. This is consistent with the claim that the secondary articulations in our
non-significant conditions typically reach a peak at C start, and are then main-
tained more-or-less unchanged until C end. In the discussion below, we some-
times use the term ‘held alignment’ to refer to this scenario, in which there is no
significant change in dorsal backness from C start to C end.


6 Interim discussion
Recall our hypotheses from section 3.4:
   1. The relative timing of primary and secondary articulations should be more vari-
able in the coda than in the onset, by (and possibly within) speaker and consonant
type. Our measures of dispersion in Table 6 do not support this prediction. (Nor
do they support an analogous hypothesis concerning labials compared to other
places of articulation.) This hypothesis would lead us to expect more spread-out
distributions for codas, relative to onsets, at C end in Fig. 6. This is not the case,
either visually or numerically (Table 6).
   However, we find some tentative support for this hypothesis below when we
examine the results by individual participant.
   2. In onset stops, both palatalization and velarization gestures should be aligned
roughly with the release of the consonant closure. As expected based on previous
findings, for palatalization this prediction holds across all three places of artic-
ulation (Figs. 4, 6): values at C end for onset /Pʲ Tʲ Kʲ/ skew positive, and are
significantly different from zero, indicating greater fronting at C end relative to
C start.
   As we noted earlier, previous work has not found such a clear pattern for
onset velarization, and we do not find compelling evidence overall for release

 18
      Padgett et al. (2023) report that the distribution for non-significant onset /Tˠ/ is more spread
      out than expected for a normal distribution according to a Shapiro-Wilks test with Bonferroni-
      corrected 𝛼 = .015/12 = .0042. However, this is also true of significant onset /Pʲ Pˠ Tʲ/ and
      coda /Tʲ/, and so this measure of dispersion also fails to distinguish our significant and non-
      significant conditions in Fig. 6.



32
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


alignment of velarization (= significant negative skew at C end) in this study
either (but see the discussion below).
   3. In coda stops, both palatalization and velarization gestures should be roughly
simultaneous with the primary articulation, achieved around the beginning of the
consonant and maintained through to the release. Here we must be more cautious,
given limitations of our analysis discussed in the previous section. Still, our re-
sults support such an interpretation for /Tˠ Kʲ Kˠ/ (Figs. 4, 6, discussion around
Table 6): values at C end seem to be centered around zero for coda /Tˠ Kʲ Kˠ/.
   Also in a more speculative vein, we hypothesized that secondary articulations
in the coda might be more aligned with the beginning of labial closures but with
the end of coronal closures. This is based on the relative strength of formant
cues for labial stops vs. release cues for coronal stops, and it has been observed
for limited Russian data. (Section 3.3). Our findings depart from predictions 1 and
2 above in ways that are suggestive in this regard.
   First, though in our data neither secondary articulations in the coda, nor ve-
larization anywhere, generally favors alignment to a particular landmark — C
beginning or release — /P/ contradicts these trends in having alignment with
a landmark in all four conditions (syllable position x secondary articulation). In
three out of these four conditions alignment favors vowel formant transitions (re-
lease alignment for onsets, beginning or VC alignment in codas). The exception
is coda /Pˠ/, which favors release alignment. Second, coda /Tʲ/ also contradicts
the above trends, in favoring release alignment. All of these facts except for that
of coda /Pˠ/ are consistent with the hypothesis that alignment of secondary ar-
ticulations is fine-tuned not just to the location but to the relative importance of
cues in labials vs. coronals. Assuming there is validity to these considerations,
it’s not clear why /Pˠ/ does not follow the expectation.
   There is a separate, articulatory, consideration relevant to the facts about labi-
als. In the case of /Tʲ Tˠ/ or /Kʲ Kˠ/, there is tongue coupling, and possibly direct
articulatory competition, between the primary articulator and a secondary dor-
sal one, while this is not true of /Pʲ Pˠ/. Perhaps this allows other factors — such
as constraints on perceptibility like those discussed here — to more freely deter-
mine timing in the latter case. However, we do find alignment with C release in
onset /Tʲ Kʲ/ and coda /Tʲ/, casting some doubt on the importance of such an
articulatory effect. (See Bennett et al. 2018 for related discussion.)


7 Inter-speaker variation
In this section we provide a preliminary investigation of inter-speaker varia-
tion in timing patterns in our data. The goal is to see how well the general-


                                                                                  33
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


izations above hold up by speaker. In addition, previous research has reported
inter-speaker variation in the production of /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrasts in Scottish Gaelic
(Sung et al. 2018) and in Russian (Kochetov 2002, 2009). As for Irish, drawing
on the same dataset analyzed here, Bennett et al. (2023) find that speakers dif-
fer in how robustly /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrasts are distinguished by dorsal position across
contexts. For example, some speakers seem to completely merge coda labi/Pˠ Pʲ/
following /iː/, at least in terms of dorsal shape and position, while other speak-
ers maintain distinct dorsal postures for these consonants in this context.19 This
pattern of inter-speaker variation, along with others observed by Bennett et al.
(2023), raises the question of whether speakers might differ with respect to the
patterns of gestural timing reported in aggregate in section 5.
   Fig. 14 shows loess-smoothed regressions for the trajectories of dorsal back-
ness values across consonant start, midpoint, and end, for all combinations of
syllable position, consonant place, and secondary articulation. This is akin to
Fig. 4, but here separate regressions are provided for each speaker. For the sake
of readability, we omit lines corresponding to the trajectories of specific tokens,
as well as confidence intervals around the loess-smoothed estimates.
   In general, the gestural timing patterns we observed in section 5 are broadly
reflected in the patterns of timing observed for each individual’s data. For exam-
ple, the secondary articulation for onset /Kʲ/ seems to peak at C release for all
three speakers whose data is included in this condition. Similarly, for both onset
and coda /Tʲ/, speakers mostly show a consistent pattern of aligning peak dor-
sal fronting with C release. However, still focusing on /Tʲ/, speakers also seem
to differ in how distinct dorsal position is at C end vs. C start for this sound, and
two speakers seem to show no significant fronting over time for onset /Tʲ.
   To quantify these patterns, we computed confidence intervals around the mean
of each speaker’s dorsal backness values at consonant end, relative to consonant
start, using a non-parametric bootstrapping resampling method, implemented
using the smean.cl.boot function in the Hmisc package in R (Harrell Jr. 2023, R
Development Core Team 2020). If the confidence interval around each speaker’s
mean at C end is significantly different from zero, this would indicate that the
dorsal position of the secondary articulation peaks at release, assuming that the
mean values are fronter for /Cʲ/ and backer for /Cˠ/. If instead the mean val-
ues are backer for /Cʲ/ and fronter for /Cˠ/, this would indicate that secondary
articulations peak at C start.

 19
      Bennett et al. (2023) report measures taken at C release for onset consonants, and at C start in
      the VC transition for coda consonants; they do not investigate possible changes in articulatory
      posture across timepoints within a given consonant, as we do here.



34
                                        1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


             P               P               T               T               K               K
             Cʲ              Cˠ              Cʲ              Cˠ              Cʲ              Cˠ
 0.1



 0.0




                                                                                                        Onset
 -0.1




 0.1



 0.0




                                                                                                        Coda
 -0.1



        Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End   Start Mid End


           Figure 14: By-speaker trajectories for backness of dorsal peak over C
           start, midpoint, end timepoints, relative to values at C start. Colored
           lines represent loess-smoothed regressions over each speaker’s values
           at each timepoint.


   In order to reduce the number of statistical comparisons involved, we limited
this analysis to backness values at C end. We chose non-parametric bootstrap-
ping to estimate the means and confidence intervals, rather than a parametric
method like a t-test, because (i) bootstrapping methods do not assume that the
underlying data is normally distributed, and (ii) bootstrapping is more robust
for smaller sample sizes. Sample size is a potential concern here, since splitting
our data up by speaker substantially reduces the number of observations per
comparison: for most combinations of speaker and condition, we have just 10-15
observations at C end (minimum = 8; 58/60 comparisons have at least 10 obser-
vations). In applying non-parametric boostrapping to this data we sampled with
replacement 10,000 times for each combination of speaker and condition. This
resulted in 60 total bootstrapped estimates (Fig. 14).
   We reiterate that caution must be taken in interpreting these results, given
the small sample sizes involved (see e.g. Chernick 2011: Ch.9 with respect to



                                                                                                           35
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


bootstrap methods, specifically). We nonetheless think it is useful to consider,
in a broad and exploratory sense, the extent to which individual speakers might
differ in their patterns of gestural timing for secondary articulations across con-
texts. Table 7 reports the significant results produced by this method, with a
significance threshold of 𝛼 = .05.20
            Table 7: Significant differences between distributions of backness val-
            ues, relative to C start, at C end, by condition. Counts refer to number
            of speakers showing each pattern.

               Pʲ                Tʲ                 Kʲ
 Onset         Release: 5/7      Release: 3/5       Release: 3/3
 Coda          VC: 3/7           Release: 3/5       0/3 significant
               Pˠ                Tˠ                                Kˠ
 Onset         Release: 6/7      Release: 2/5, C start: 1/5        C start: 1/3
 Coda          Release: 3/7      Release: 1/5, VC: 1/5             VC: 1/3

   Again, the results in Table 7 broadly reflect the findings of section 5. First,
palatalized /Cʲ/ consistently shows release alignment in onset position. For each
place of articulation, the majority of speakers represented in that condition show
release alignment, though it is not everyone. Two speakers do not align the peak
of onset palatalization with the release of /Pʲ/, and likewise for /Tʲ/. In most other
conditions few or no speakers show alignment with either consonant landmark.
The exceptions are familiar from the discussion in section 6: several/most speak-
ers do align secondary articulations for labials and for /Tʲ/.
   Fig. 15 plots the same data as in Fig. 14, but pooled across places of articulation,
so that each estimated trajectory is based on a larger number of observations.
One can see in this figure our overall findings that onset palatalization aligns
with C release while coda secondary articulations remain relatively unchanging
throughout. We see release alignment for onset velarization as well, but this is
mostly attributable to onset /Pˠ/ as we have seen.
   On the whole, we can draw two tentative conclusions from the above. First,
alignment patterns for individual speakers more or less replicate the overall pop-
ulation trends reported in section 5. Second, however, there are signs of the vari-
ability predicted by our first hypothesis in section 6. Though we did not find
 20
      Given the fact that Table 7 reports multiple comparisons, we should arguably use a Bonferroni-
      corrected significance threshold of 𝛼 = .05/60 ≈ .0008. Since this is an extremely conservative
      threshold for significance, and since our aims here are mostly exploratory, we opted for the
      standard 𝛼 = .05 instead. Using the conservative threshold of 𝛼 = .0008 shrinks the number of
      significant results in Table 7 from 33 to 21, but does not affect the broad qualitative conclusions
      we would draw from this data.


36
                                     1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study



                                      Cʲ                      Cˠ

                     0.05




                                                                            Onset
                     0.00
                     -0.05


                     0.05




                                                                            Coda
                     0.00
                     -0.05

                             Start   Mid    End       Start   Mid    End

            Figure 15: By-speaker trajectories for backness of dorsal peak over C
            start, midpoint, end timepoints, relative to values at C start. Colored
            lines represent loess-smoothed regressions over each speaker’s values
            at each timepoint, collapsing across place of articulation.

greater variability for codas (or for labials) in our pooled data, here we see that
more patterns of alignment occur in codas than in onsets. Specifically, while re-
lease alignment and held alignment are the only patterns found for onset conso-
nants (except for one speaker who aligned with C start for /Tʲ/), we find release,
VC transition, and held alignment in the case of codas.21 There is likewise some
suggestive evidence here that speakers may differ, to some extent, in their pre-
ferred timing patterns across different contexts.
   To be sure, more work needs to be done to verify that these patterns of variabil-
ity reflect bonafide inter-speaker differences, rather than accidental facts about
our particular sample of speakers and recordings. Confirming these patterns of
variability in a larger dataset, and exploring potential underlying causes (e.g. di-
alect variation), is a clear topic for future research.


8 Against anti-phase timing as the source of onset-coda
  asymmetries in palatalization
Our discussion has assumed that secondary dorsal articulations in Irish are coor-
dinated with consonantal landmarks, as defined by the production of the conso-
 21
      When alignment is not aligned uniquely with the beginning or end of the consonant (= ‘held
      alignment’), this might be understood as alignment with both, i.e. simultaneous production, as
      discussed earlier.



                                                                                                 37
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


nant’s primary articulation. This strikes us as a reasonable assumption: after all,
palatalization and velarization are properties of consonants, at least phonologi-
cally.
   Beyond alignment with consonant landmarks, we have suggested (section 3.3)
that timing of secondary articulations might be constrained in perceptually adap-
tive ways. For example, in coda position, speakers must ‘choose’ whether to align
the peak of a secondary articulation near the V-C boundary, where formant tran-
sition cues reside, at C release, where there are cues from burst quality, or with
both landmarks. Both of these landmarks are important, perceptually speaking,
for expressing secondary articulation contrasts. In coda position, unlike in onset
position, these landmarks do not coincide, and so speakers can align peak /Cʲ Cˠ/
gestures at the V-C transition, or at the C release; or they can try to maintain
the peak /Cʲ Cˠ/ gesture throughout the entire consonant, so that the gesture oc-
curs at both the V-C transition and C release. Evidently, speakers adopt different
timing strategies in coda position depending on the place and secondary articu-
lation of the consonant, in ways that seem largely consistent with the hypothesis
of perceptual optimization (section 5).
   However, given the broad asymmetry we find between patterns of gestural
alignment in the onset vs. coda for palatalization, we might look elsewhere for an
understanding of what is happening. Studies of articulatory coordination have
reported asymmetries in how segment-internal gestures are timed in onset vs.
coda position. To illustrate, consider the American English lateral /l/, which
has both a primary tongue tip constriction, and a secondary, vowel-like dorsal
constriction (e.g. Krakow 1999, Sproat & Fujimura 1993, Proctor 2009, Lee-Kim et
al. 2013, Turton 2017). In onset position (e.g. lab), the coronal and dorsal gestures
for /l/ are largely synchronous. However, in coda position (e.g. ball), they appear
to be produced sequentially, with the dorsal constriction preceding the coronal
constriction in time. In codas, the overlap of the dorsal constriction for /l/ with
the preceding vowel leads to a distinct and highly audible coloration of the vowel
itself.
   Similar observations have been made for the relative timing of oral closure
and velum lowering in the American English nasals /m n/ (Krakow 1999, Byrd
et al. 2009). In this case, velar lowering is largely synchronous with oral closure
formation in onsets, but precedes closure formation in codas, producing exten-
sive coarticulatory nasalization on the preceding vowel. Generalizing over these
results, we can perhaps say that more open constrictions tend to precede more
narrow constrictions for articulatorily complex consonants in coda position, at
least in American English (Krakow 1999, Sproat & Fujimura 1993, Iskarous &
Kavitskaya 2010).


38
                               1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


   These asymmetries in articulatory timing have been interpreted as a reflec-
tion of different underlying patterns of gestural coordination in onsets vs. codas.
In onsets, gestures tend to be coordinated in-phase, or synchronously. In codas,
gestures tend to be coordinated anti-phase, or sequentially. It has been argued
that in-phase coordination is inherently more stable than anti-phase coordina-
tion, not just in speech but in motor planning and execution more generally (e.g.
Goldstein et al. 2006, Nam et al. 2009, Parrell 2012 and references there). We
might thus expect gestural alignment between primary and secondary constric-
tions to be more variable in codas for /Cʲ Cˠ/, exactly as we find (at least for
palatalization), if those constrictions are timed in an anti-phase relationship.
   There are at least two reasons to doubt this alternative analysis. First, Irish
palatalization timing is more variable in the coda only in the sense of allowing
more patterns of alignment depending on place of articulation (and to some ex-
tent speaker), as just discussed: alignment tends toward C start for /Pʲ/, C release
for /Tʲ/, and neither for /Kʲ/. In other words, as shown in Figure 6 and Table
6, differences between onset and coda position in our study mostly boil down
to which landmark the secondary articulation is coordinated with. Measures of
variance for the timing of primary and secondary articulations actually imply
similar variance in onset vs. coda position, not increased variance in codas.
   Second, palatalization is not simultaneous with the primary constriction in
onset position; rather, this study and previous ones have found a very consistent
lag in the palatalization gesture, in both Irish and Russian, such that the peak
occurs around the release of the primary constriction (see also Shaw et al. 2021).
As for coda position, though secondary articulations in our data peak around the
onset of the primary constriction in the case of /Pʲ/, this is not true at all for other
conditions. Furthermore, as we saw in section 3.3, for Russian consonants other
than stops, the facts suggest secondary articulations that are co-extensive with
the primary ones, as we have found for some conditions here.
   In the current study, we can investigate this question empirically, building on
the discussion of Russian in Iskarous & Kavitskaya (2010). If secondary /Cʲ Cˠ/
are timed anti-phase (sequentially), then the gestural peak for /Cʲ Cˠ/ should
occur during the vowel, well prior to the achievement of the primary constriction.
This would mirror findings for American English /l/ and nasals in coda position,
in which the dorsal constriction for /l/, and the velar lowering for /m n/, are
timed to reach a peak during the vowel itself.
   A major acoustic correlate for the /Cʲ Cˠ/ contrast in Irish (and other lan-
guages) is the F2 transition on neighboring vowels. F2 largely reflects dorsal back-
ness in this context; it is also affected by lip rounding (e.g. Bennett et al. 2019).
If /Cʲ Cˠ/ gestures peak during the vowel in VC# coda sequences, as predicted


                                                                                     39
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


by anti-phase alignment, F2 values should show evidence of peaking during the
vowel as well.
   To assess this prediction, we measured F2 during the vowel in /VC#/ sequences,
where our target consonant was a word-final coda consonant. The vowel was
segmented from the preceding consonant at the beginning of voicing: since our
focus is on VC transitions, not CV transitions, the criterion used to identify the
beginning of the vowel is not especially important. The vowel was segmented
from the following target stop consonant at the point where spectral energy in
the vowel abruptly dropped off, particularly in the region of F2 (see e.g. Turk et
al. 2006). Any preaspiration on the following final consonant was segmented as
part of the vowel itself, since significant formant transitions may occur during
periods of aspiration (e.g. Stevens & Klatt 1974; see also Clayton 2010). Formant
tracking may be less accurate during preaspiration than during vowels, given
the presence of aperiodic noise, and the relative weakness of higher formants
during aspiration. That said, visual inspection of a number of preaspirated tokens
suggests that F2 was still tracked fairly well during preaspirated transitions. 630
vowels were segmented in this analysis.22
   F1, F2, and F3 were extracted from each vowel using the Fast Track Praat plugin
(Boersma & Weenink 2020, Barreda 2021; https://github.com/santiagobarreda/
FastTrack). The first three formants were measured every 2ms during the vowel,
and the resulting formant trajectories were then time-normalized before plotting
(Fig. 16). Formants were extracted using the default settings of the Fast Track
plugin, except that the number of analysis steps was set to 24.
   In order to pool F2 measurements across speakers, each speaker’s formant
values were normalized using Barreda-Neary log-additive regression normaliza-
tion (Barreda & Nearey 2018). These normalized values were highly correlated
(𝑟 = 0.96) with normalized values produced by a different method, namely di-
viding F1 and F2 by F3 at the same measurement point (e.g. Monahan & Idsardi
2010). Outliers were excluded from analysis by removing values for F2 which
were greater than 2 standard deviations away from the mean for each formant.
This resulted in the elimination of 460 F2 measurements, about 0.7% of the orig-
inal F2 data. This left 66,677 F2 measurements for analysis (630 vowels, with a
mean of 106 F2 measurements per vowel).
   Figure 16 provides loess-smoothed F2 trajectories during the vowel in /VC#/
sequences, comparing coda /Cˠ Cʲ/ at each place of articulation, in combination
with the vowels /iː ɔː uː/.
 22
      F1 tracking was noisy, particularly for our Ulster speakers. We assume this is due to preaspira-
      tion, which appears to have less of an effect on F2 tracking, the formant we’re mostly interested
      in here.



40
                                                         1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study



                                     P                             T                         K
                0.8

                0.4
                                                                                                               iː
                0.0
Normalized F2




                -0.4
                 0.8

                0.4
                                                                                                               ɔː   Cˠ
                0.0                                                                                                 Cʲ
                -0.4
                 0.8

                0.4
                                                                                                               uː
                0.0

                -0.4
                       0   20   40       60   80 100 0   20   40       60   80 100 0   20   40   60   80 100

                 Normalized time (%) of vowel preceding coda C

                       Figure 16: Pooled, speaker-normalized F2 trajectories across time-
                       normalized steps, grouped by primary place of articulation and vowel
                       context, for coda /VC#/. Lines represent loess-smoothed regressions
                       over F2 values preceding /Cˠ Cʲ/ in each condition: solid black line for
                       /Cˠ/, dashed red line for /Cʲ/. Gray vertical line marks 50% point of
                       the vowel.


   Our empirical question is when F2 peaks for /Cʲ/, or reaches a minimum for
/Cˠ/, in /VC#/ sequences. Since F2 is our acoustic surrogate for dorsal fronting
and backing, extreme values for F2 should correspond to the timepoints at which
the tongue body is furthest front for /Cʲ/, or back for /Cˠ/.
   Answering this question is easiest for /VC#/ sequences in which the vowel
and following consonant have different backness specifications. This is because
we expect to find very salient F2 movements in cases of mismatched vowel and
consonant backness (Bennett et al. 2018), which should make it easy to see where
F2 trajectories reach their most extreme values. In our data, this corresponds to
/iːCˠ/ sequences for velarized coda consonants, and /uːCʲ/ and /ɔːCʲ/ sequences
for palatalized coda consonants.23
   23
         It should be acknowledged that our use of the symbols /iː uː ɔː/ to describe vowel quality
         obscures some variation in the quality of these vowels between speakers. Most notably, our
         Ulster speakers tend to front /uː ɔː/, often producing them as something like [ʌː ɛː]. Note,
         though, that the fronting of /uː ɔː/ should actually make palatalized /Cʲ/ seem less front, by
         comparison, in this context. Despite that fact, we still see clear fronting at C start relative to
         the preceding vowel for /Cʲ/ after /uː ɔː/ in Fig. 16.



                                                                                                                         41
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


   We begin with /uːCʲ/, corresponding to dashed red lines in the bottom row of
Fig. 16. Here, it is clear that F2 begins to rise around V midpoint, or even earlier,
and does not reach its peak until the beginning of the following consonant. The
same pattern holds, perhaps even more clearly, for /Cʲ/ after /ɔ:/ (dashed red
line, middle row).
   For /iːCˠ/ sequences (solid black line, top row) it is again clear that F2 reaches
an extreme value at C start, rather than any earlier timepoint. A potential excep-
tion is /iːkˠ/, which shows a relatively flat F2 trajectory throughout the vowel;
but even here we can see a slight lowering of F2 at the VC transition, into the
beginning of the consonant.
   The same patterns are visible if we plot F2 trajectories in physical rather than
normalized time. Fig. 17 shows vowel F2 for up to 200ms preceding the follow-
ing coda consonant. Vertical arrows mark when F2 reaches its expected extreme
value in each loess curve for /iːCˠ uːCʲ ɔːCʲ/, the contexts in which there is a
mismatch in backness between the vowel and following coda consonant.

                                   P                          T                          K
                0.8

                0.4
                                                                                                          iː
                0.0
Normalized F2




                                              0ms                        0ms                        0ms
                -0.4
                 0.8

                0.4
                                                                                                          ɔː   Cˠ
                0.0
                                                                                                               Cʲ
                                         14ms                            0ms                        0ms
                -0.4
                 0.8

                0.4
                                                                                                          uː
                0.0
                                              0ms                        0ms                        0ms
                -0.4
                       200   150   100   50     0 200   150   100   50     0 200   150   100   50     0

                                   Time (in ms) preceding coda C

                       Figure 17: Pooled, speaker-normalized F2 trajectories across time,
                       grouped by primary place of articulation and vowel context, for coda
                       /VC#/. X-axis shows ms preceding closure of following coda consonant
                       (up to 200ms). Arrows mark F2 extrema of loess curves for /iːCˠ uːCʲ
                       ɔːCʲ/ (peak for /Cʲ/, trough for /Cˠ/).

  We can compare the timecourse of F2 movement in Fig. 17 to the timing lags
for the tongue tip and body gestures of non-contrastive dark [ɫ] reported by


42
                                     1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


e.g. Sproat & Fujimura (1993) and Gick et al. (2006). Sproat & Fujimura (1993:
299,303) report lags of 30-110ms between an earlier dorsal constriction and a later
tongue tip constriction for coda [ɫ] in American English. Gick et al. (2006: Tab.
2) report smaller lags (≈ 20-25ms) for Western Canadian English, Quebec French,
and Squamish Salish.24 Browman & Goldstein (1995) present 4 X-ray microbeam
tokens of ‘peel’ [pʰiɫ] from 1 speaker, and find that tongue body retraction for
[ɫ] peaks approximately 20-50ms before tongue tip closure for [ɫ] is completed,
i.e. during the preceding vowel.
   In contrast, Fig. 17 shows that F2 extrema for these loess curves generally occur
at the beginning of closure for the coda consonant, at least in those conditions
where F2 transitions are most visible and interpretable due to a mismatch in
backness between the vowel and following coda consonant. The only exception
is /ɔːPʲ/, which has just a 14ms lag between the F2 peak during the vowel and the
following coda /Pʲ/ in our data. There is clearly a contrast between these timing
patterns, which imply (near) simultaneity between primary and secondary artic-
ulations in /VC/, and the more sequential timing reported for non-contrastive
dark [ɫ] in Sproat & Fujimura (1993), and Gick et al. (2006) (see also Browman &
Goldstein 1995, Krakow 1999).25
   These patterns are incompatible with the claim that dorsal gestures for sec-
ondary /Cˠ Cʲ/ articulations in coda position peak during the preceding vowel.
Consequently, they are also incompatible with the claim that secondary /Cˠ Cʲ/
articulations are timed to precede primary articulations in coda position. That is,
the available evidence argues against the hypothesis that primary and secondary
articulations are timed in a sequential, anti-phase relation in coda position.
   The alternative hypothesis, which we adopt, is that secondary /Cˠ Cʲ/ articu-
lations are timed in-phase with either C start or C release, or with both, in coda
position. (See also Shaw et al. 2021 on the timing of palatalization gestures with
primary articulations in onset position.) We propose that this variability in tim-
ing reflects the fact that there is no single perceptually-optimal timing pattern in
coda position, unlike onset position. In the absence of a unique, optimal timing

 24
    The difference in lag magnitudes reported by Sproat & Fujimura (1993) vs. Gick et al. (2006)
    likely reflects the fact that Sproat & Fujimura investigated /l/ darkening across a wider range
    of contexts, leading to greater variability in segment duration. Inter-speaker variation may
    also play a role, as Gick et al. (2006: 65) note. Gick et al. (2006) is also an ultrasound study with
    a relatively low framerate (30 fps ≈ 1 frame every 33ms), so their reported lag values are not
    particularly precise.
 25
    Gick et al. (2006) similarly find simultaneous alignment of primary and secondary articulation
    in Serbo-Croatian /lˠ/, rather than anti-phase alignment as in English, and relate this finding
    to the fact of a palatalization contrast for laterals in the language (/lˠ/ vs. /lʲ/).



                                                                                                     43
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


pattern, speakers may be expected to show variation between different alterna-
tives, giving rise to the gestural timing patterns we report here.


9 Discussion and conclusion
We began with the observation that secondary /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrasts are often elim-
inated in coda position and among labial consonants. This typological fact likely
has a phonetic source in the relative difficulty of perceiving /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrasts
in these contexts (e.g. Kochetov 2002, 2004, Ní Chiosáin & Padgett 2012, Padgett
& Ní Chiosáin 2018), and the tendency to reduce articulatory gestures, including
palatalization gestures, in codas (e.g. Kochetov 2002, 2006, 2009, Bennett et al.
2023).
   Our results may extend this broad line of reasoning, to the extent that they
suggest greater variability in timing strategies in coda position compared to on-
set position. Timing patterns which are more variable across contexts (such as
place and syllable position) might be harder for listeners to attend to. If timing
patterns also differ by speaker, this would be even more clearly true, since lis-
teners cannot know ahead of time when the peak dorsal gestures for /C( ˠ) Cʲ/
contrasts will occur.
   However, we have also argued that productions may be organized in ways that
make life easier for listeners (whether this is intentional or not, see discussion
in section 3.1). In our data, secondary articulations in onset position are either
timed to peak at C release, or appear to be held constant from C beginning to
C release. In either case, gestural timing makes key acoustic information about
/C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrasts available at crucial perceptual landmarks, namely C release
itself, and the following CV transition for onsets.
   In coda position, consonants at different places of articulation show different
timing patterns. The palatalization gesture for coda labial /Pʲ/ peaks at the VC
transition. We have suggested that this reflects the perceptual importance of for-
mant transitions for signaling /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrasts in labials, given the weak and
relatively uninformative release bursts of labial stops. For coda coronal /Tʲ/, we
instead find alignment of secondary articulations to C release; we have suggested
that this reflects the acoustic and perceptual salience of coronal stop releases,
which are very informative as to /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrast in Irish (e.g. Ní Chiosáin &
Padgett 2012). If the secondary articulations for coda /Tˠ Kʲ Kˠ/ are held roughly
constant until C release, as we’ve argued, that too may reflect the perceptual im-
portance of release cues for coronal and dorsal stops.
   We have seen that timing patterns for velarized /Cˠ/ seem to be more am-
biguous, or perhaps more varied, than the timing patterns found for palatalized


44
                                      1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


/Cʲ/, particularly in onset position (as also found by Bennett et al. 2018). Why
should this be? One idea pursued in Bennett et al. (2023) connects this finding to
an independently known fact about palatal constrictions: they are more resistant
to coarticulation (and more likely to induce coarticulation in other sounds) than
many other kinds of sounds. Put differently, palatal constrictions exhibit a high
degree of articulatory constraint (Recasens et al. 1997, Recasens 1999, Recasens
& Espinosa 2009, Farnetani & Recasens 2010, Recasens & Rodríguez 2016). A re-
viewer suggests a second (possibly related) idea: that tongue body fronting may
involve less complex muscle engagement than tongue body raising and backing
(see e.g. Gick et al. 2012: 152-8). Finally, we know that lip rounding plays a role
in enhancing velarization in Irish (Bennett et al. 2019). A fuller understanding of
gestural timing in /Cˠ Cʲ/ contrasts may therefore require attention to the move-
ment of the lips, as well as the tongue. We leave all of these ideas for further
research.
   It should be borne in mind that our results here pertain only to stop consonants.
As discussed in section 3.3, previous findings on Russian suggest that timing
facts may depend on a consonant’s manner of articulation.26 Unlike stops, other
consonants such as fricatives, nasals and liquids do not have release bursts, and
they may carry internal cues to the palatalization contrast. Whether a lateral is
palatalized or velarized, for example, is easily audible during closure. Hence we
do not readily expect our findings to extend to other manners of articulation, and
further reasearch on this topic is called for.
   Our characterization of the issues has been oversimplified in an important
way: we have discussed cues to palatalization without considering the larger
phonetic context in which a word occurs. If a word like píob /pʲiːbˠ/ occurs
in isolation, then indeed the cues to palatalization of the initial consonant lie
only at the consonant’s release, and those of the final consonant lie at both the
VC transition and the consonant’s release (assuming the consonant is released,
as it generally would be in Irish). However our target words were in a different
context, since we used the carrier sentence [ˈdˠuːrʲtʲ ˈiːfˠə ___ əˈnˠʊrˠə] ‘Aoife
said ___ last year’. They were preceded by a vowel-final word and followed by a
vowel-initial one. In such a context a listener could in principle have access to VC
formant transitions, a burst and CV formant transitions for both initial and final
consonants. Why, then, did we not find identical patterns of timing for initial and
final consonants?
   Had we manipulated the phrasal context, independently varying the immedi-
ate segmental context of initial versus final consonants, and had this had effects
 26
      Bennett et al. (2018) do not find a difference in timing between Irish stops and fricatives, but
      they only examine consonants in word-/syllable-initial position.



                                                                                                   45
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


on timing, we might have concluded that speakers can adjust the relative tim-
ing of primary and secondary articulations ‘online’, that is, in a way that adapts
to phrasal context. We did not manipulate phrasal context. However, since we
in fact found different patterns of timing for initial and final consonants, even
though the segmental context was the same (V V), our conclusion might rather
be that speakers cannot adjust the relative timing of articulations in this way.
Though somewhat speculative, this conclusion seems well in line with the hy-
pothesis that word-internal gestural timing is lexically-specified, and so less vari-
able than the relative timing of gestures across a word boundary (Browman &
Goldstein 1988, Byrd 1996, Browman & Goldstein 2000), an idea supported by the
results of Cho (2001) (see Strycharczuk 2019, Mousikou et al. 2021 and references
therein for further evidence and discussion). The question then becomes, what
patterns of timing, fixed in the lexicon, would be most perceptually adaptive?
Such patterns of timing would have to facilitate the perception of cues to palatal-
ization not only in the most accommodating of environments (such as that of
our carrier sentence); they would have to succeed in all environments, includ-
ing ones where a consonant is preceded or followed by silence or a consonant
(see Flemming 2001: 30-1 for a similar point). It is possible that lexically-specified
gestural timing ‘gravitates’ to settings that work best for listeners across all en-
vironments.
   Overall, our data suggests that relatively low-level timing patterns in the pro-
duction of the Irish may be structured in such a way as to maximize the percep-
tual salience and recoverability of cues to /C( ˠ) Cʲ/ contrasts.


Abbreviations
sg.    singular
                                          P    labial stop
pl.    plural
                                          T    coronal stop
gen.   genitive
                                          K    dorsal stop
fps    frames per second

Contributions
Ryan Bennett and Jaye Padgett contributed to conceptualization of the project,
design of the methodology and items, data collection, data analysis, and writing.
Grant McGuire and Máire Ní Chiosáin contributed to conceptualization of the
project, design of the methodology and items, data collection, reviewing of the
manuscript, and editing. Jennifer Bellik contributed to data analysis.



46
                               1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


Appendix

       Table 8: Words used in the study: onset/word-initial position

                           p/b                  t/d             k
            iː             bˠiː                 tˠiː           kˠiː
                        ‘yellow’            ‘straw’          ‘way’
                         pʲiːsˠə             dʲiːnˠ          kʲiːrˠ
                         ‘piece’             ‘roof’        ‘a comb’
           uː           pˠuːkˠə              tˠuːsˠ           kˠuː
                         ‘ghost’           ‘a start’      ‘a hound’
                           bʲuː               tʲuːsˠ      kʲu:nˠəsˠ
                    ‘would be worth’     ‘thickness’   ‘quiet (noun)’
           ɔː              pˠɔː                tˠɔː          kˠɔːrˠ
                      ‘pay, wages’         ‘is (be)’          ‘car’
                          pʲɔːnˠ              tʲɔːnˠ         kʲɔːnˠ
                          ‘pen’              ‘tight’     ‘one/head’


           Table 9: Words used in the study: coda/word-final position

                              p/b                  t/d            k/g
      iː                    pʲiːbˠ               i:ədˠ           i:əkˠ
                       ‘pipes (gen.pl)’         ‘them’           ‘pay’
                             pʲiːbʲ              trʲiːdʲ         bʲe:kʲ
                           ‘pipes’            ‘through’        ‘shout’
      uː                    lˠuːbˠ                uːdˠ         ɡlʲuːkˠ
                           ‘stitch’              ‘that’         ‘peep’
                            lˠuːbʲ              klˠuːdʲ         bˠuːkʲ
                 ‘stitch (dat.sg./variant)’   ‘covering’     ‘pinnacle’
      ɔː                    lˠɔːbˠ              stˠɔːtˠ         fˠɔːɡˠ
                       ‘mud (variant)’          ‘state’        ‘leave’
                            lˠɔːbʲ                 ɔːtʲ         rˠɔːɡʲ
                            ‘mud’               ‘place’    ‘sudden rush’




                                                                               47
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik

        Table 10: Token counts by speaker, place, and secondary articulation

                 Dialect      Speaker     C place     /Cˠ Cʲ/    n
                 Connacht     1           Labial      Cˠ        89
                 Connacht     1           Labial      Cʲ        90
                 Connacht     2           Labial      Cˠ        72
                 Connacht     2           Labial      Cʲ        72
                 Connacht     2           Coronal     Cˠ        71
                 Connacht     2           Coronal     Cʲ        66
                 Connacht     2           Dorsal      Cˠ        72
                 Connacht     2           Dorsal      Cʲ        71
                 Connacht     3           Labial      Cˠ        90
                 Connacht     3           Labial      Cʲ        89
                 Connacht     3           Dorsal      Cˠ        84
                 Connacht     3           Dorsal      Cʲ        87
                 Munster      1           Labial      Cˠ        90
                 Munster      1           Labial      Cʲ        90
                 Munster      1           Coronal     Cˠ        85
                 Munster      1           Coronal     Cʲ        83
                 Munster      2           Labial      Cˠ        86
                 Munster      2           Labial      Cʲ        88
                 Munster      2           Coronal     Cˠ        79
                 Munster      2           Coronal     Cʲ        85
                 Ulster       1           Labial      Cˠ        90
                 Ulster       1           Labial      Cʲ        90
                 Ulster       1           Coronal     Cˠ        90
                 Ulster       1           Coronal     Cʲ        86
                 Ulster       2           Labial      Cˠ        90
                 Ulster       2           Labial      Cʲ        90
                 Ulster       2           Coronal     Cˠ        90
                 Ulster       2           Coronal     Cʲ        84
                 Ulster       2           Dorsal      Cˠ        90
                 Ulster       2           Dorsal      Cʲ        90




48
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


References
Baayen, R. Harald, Douglas Davidson & Douglas Bates. 2008. Mixed-effects mod-
  eling with crossed random effects for subjects and items. Journal of memory
  and language 59(4). 390–412.
Barr, Dale, Roger Levy, Christoph Scheepers & Harry Tily. 2013. Random ef-
  fects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: keep it maximal. Journal
  of Memory and Language 68(3). 255–278. DOI: 10.1016/j.jml.2012.11.001.
Barreda, Santiago. 2021. Fast Track: fast (nearly) automatic formant-tracking us-
  ing Praat. Linguistics Vanguard 7(1). 20200051.
Barreda, Santiago & Terrance Nearey. 2018. A regression approach to vowel nor-
  malization for missing and unbalanced data. The Journal of the Acoustical So-
  ciety of America 144(1). 500–520.
Bateman, Nicoleta. 2011. On the typology of palatalization. Language and Linguis-
  tics Compass 5(8). 588–602.
Bennett, Ryan, Máire Ní Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire. 2018. An
  ultrasound study of Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization. Jour-
  nal of the International Phonetic Association 48(3). 261–304. DOI: 10 . 1017 /
  S0025100317000494.
Bennett, Ryan, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jenny Bellik.
  2023. Effects of syllable position and place of articulation on secondary dorsal
  contrasts: an ultrasound study of irish. ms. University of California, Santa Cruz
  and University College Dublin.
Bennett, Ryan, Jaye Padgett, Máire Ní Chiosáin, Grant McGuire & Jennifer Bel-
  lik. 2019. Contrast enhancement and cue trading in Irish secondary consonant
  articulations. In Sasha Calhoun, Paola Escudero, Marija Tabain & Paul Warren
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 19th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Mel-
  bourne, Australia 2019, 3584–3552. Canberra, Australia: Australasian Speech
  Science and Technology Association Inc. https : / / assta . org / proceedings /
  ICPhS2019/papers/ICPhS%5C_3597.pdf.
Bird, Sonya & Natallia Litvin. 2021. Belarusian. Journal of the International Pho-
  netic Association 51(3). 450–467. DOI: 10.1017/s0025100319000288.
Biteeva, Ekaterina. 2021. Complexité et contrôle du geste linguo-palatal sous
  l’éclairage de sa variabilité. le cas de la palatalisation en russe. aspects phoné-
  tiques et phonologiques. Université Grenoble Alpes. (Doctoral dissertation).
Boersma, Paul & David Weenink. 2020. Praat: doing phonetics by computer (ver-
  sion 6.1.05). Computer program. Retrieved from http://www.praat.org/.




                                                                                  49
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


Bolker, Benjamin, Mollie Brooks, Connie Clark, Shane Geange, John Poulsen, M.
   Henry Stevens & Jada-Simone White. 2009. Generalized linear mixed models:
   a practical guide for ecology and evolution. Trends in ecology and evolution
   24(3). 127–135.
Browman, Catherine & Louis Goldstein. 1988. Some notes on syllable structure
   in Articulatory Phonology. Phonetica 45(2-4). 140–155.
Browman, Catherine & Louis Goldstein. 1995. Gestural syllable position effects
   in American English. In Fredericka Bell-Berti & Lawrence J. Raphael (eds.), 19–
   33. Woodbury, NY: AIP Press.
Browman, Catherine & Louis Goldstein. 2000. Competing constraints on in-
   tergestural coordination and self-organization of phonological structures. Les
   Cahiers de l’ICP. Bulletin de la communication parlée 5. 25–34.
Byrd, Dani. 1996. A phase window framework for articulatory timing. Phonology
   13(2). 139–169.
Byrd, Dani, Stephen Tobin, Erik Bresch & Shrikanth Narayanan. 2009. Timing
   effects of syllable structure and stress on nasals: a real-time MRI examination.
  Journal of Phonetics 37(1). 97–110.
Chernick, Michael. 2011. Bootstrap methods: a guide for practitioners and re-
   searchers. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Chitoran, Ioana. 2013. The phonology of Romanian: a constraint-based approach.
   Berlin: De Gruyter.
Cho, Taehong. 2001. Effects of morpheme boundaries on intergestural timing:
   evidence from korean. Phonetica 58(3). 129–162.
Clayton, Ian. 2010. On the natural history of preaspirated stops. University of
   North Carolina at Chapel Hill. (Doctoral dissertation).
Czaplicki, Bartłomiej. 2010. Palatalized labials in Polish dialects: an evolutionary
   perspective. Journal of Slavic linguistics 18(2). 259–290.
De Bhaldraithe, Tomás. 1975. The Irish of Cois Fhairrge, Co. Galway: a phonetic
   study. First published 1945. Dublin: Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies.
De Búrca, Seán. 1977. Syllabicity and palatalization. Studia Celtica 12. 396–404.
Eska, Joseph F. 2017. The dialectology of Celtic. In Jared Klein, Brian Joseph,
   Matthias Fritz & Mark Wenthe (eds.), Handbook of comparative and historical
   Indo-European linguistics, 1264–1274. Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.
Farnetani, Edda & Daniel Recasens. 2010. Coarticulation and connected speech
   processes. In William Hardcastle, John Laver & Fiona Gibbon (eds.), The hand-
   book of phonetic sciences, 316–352. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Flemming, Edward. 2001. Scalar and categorical phenomena in a unified model
   of phonetics and phonology. Phonology 18(1). 7–44.



50
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


Frick, Robert. 1995. Accepting the null hypothesis. Memory & Cognition 23(1).
   132–138.
Fujimura, Osamu, Marian Macchi & Lynn Streeter. 1978. Perception of stop con-
   sonants with conflicting transitional cues. Language and Speech 21. 337–343.
   DOI: 10.1177/002383097802100408.
Gelman, Andrew & Jennifer Hill. 2006. Data analysis using regression and multi-
   level/hierarchical models. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gick, Bryan, Fiona Campbell, Sunyoung Oh & Linda Tamburri-Watt. 2006. To-
   ward universals in the gestural organization of syllables: a cross-linguistic
   study of liquids. Journal of phonetics.
Gick, Bryan, Ian Wilson & Donald Derrick. 2012. Articulatory phonetics. Malden,
   MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Gick, Bryan, Ian Wilson, Karsten Koch & Clare Cook. 2004. Language-specific ar-
   ticulatory settings: evidence from inter-utterance rest position. Phonetica 61(4).
   220–233.
Goldstein, Louis, Dani Byrd & Elliot Saltzman. 2006. The role of vocal tract ges-
   tural action units in understanding the evolution of phonology. In Michael A.
   Arbib (ed.), Action to language via the mirror neuron system, 215–249. Cam-
   bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Green, Antony Dubach. 2001. The prosodic representation of clitics in irish. In
   Birgit Gerlach & Janet Grijzenhout (eds.), Clitics in phonology, morphology and
   syntax, 181–218. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Greene, David. 1973. The growth of palatalization in Old Irish. Transactions of the
   Philological Society 72(1). 127–136.
Harrell Jr., Frank E. 2023. Hmisc: Harrell Miscellaneous. R package version 5.0-1.
   https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=Hmisc.
Hickey, Raymond. 2011. The dialects of irish: study of a changing landscape. Berlin:
   Walter de Gruyter.
Hueber, T., G. Challet & M. Stone B. Denby. 2008. Acquisition of ultrasound, video
   and acoustic speech data for a silent-speech interface application. In Desmond
   Derbyshire & Geoffrey Pullum (eds.), Proceedings of international seminar on
   speech production (strasbourg, france), 365–369.
International Phonetic Association (ed.). 1999. Handbook of the international pho-
   netic association. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Iskarous, Khalil & Darya Kavitskaya. 2010. The interaction between contrast,
   prosody, and coarticulation in structuring phonetic variability. Journal of pho-
   netics 38(4). 625–639.




                                                                                  51
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


Iskarous, Khalil & Darya Kavitskaya. 2018. Sound change and the structure of
   synchronic variability: phonetic and phonological factors in Slavic palataliza-
   tion. Language 94(1). 43–83.
Jackson, Kenneth. 1967. Palatalization of labials in the Gaelic languages. In Wolf-
   gang Meid (ed.), Beiträge zur indogermanistik und keltologie, 179–192. Inns-
   bruck: Sprachwissenschaftliches Institut der Universität Innsbruck.
Katsika, Argyro. 2016. The role of prominence in determining the scope of
   boundary-related lengthening in Greek. Journal of Phonetics 55. 149–181.
Kingston, John. 1990. Articulatory binding. In John Kingston & Mary Beckman
   (eds.), Papers in laboratory phonology I: between the grammar and the physics
   of speech, 406–434. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kingston, John. 2019. The interface between phonetics and phonology. In William
   F. Katz & Peter F. Assmann (eds.), The routledge handbook of phonetics, 359–400.
   New York: Routledge.
Kingston, John & Randy Diehl. 1994. Phonetic knowledge. Language 70(3). 419–
   454.
Kirkham, Sam & Claire Nance. 2022. Diachronic phonological asymmetries and
   the variable stability of synchronic contrast. Journal of Phonetics 94. 101176.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2002. Production, perception and emergent phonotactic patterns:
   a case of contrastive palatalization. Routledge.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2004. Perception of place and secondary articulation contrasts
   in different syllable positions: language-particular and language-independent
   asymmetries. Language and Speech 47(4). 351–382.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2005. Phonetic sources of phonological asymmetries: Russian
   laterals and rhotics. In Proceedings of the 2005 canadian linguistics association
   annual conference.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2006. Syllable position effects and gestural organization: evi-
   dence from Russian. In Louis Goldstein, D.H. Whalen & Catherine Best (eds.),
   Papers in laboratory phonology VIII, 565–588. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2009. Phonetic variation and gestural specification: production
   of Russian consonants. In Aditi Lahiri, Frank Kügler, Caroline Féry & Ruben
   van de Vijver (eds.), Variation and gradience in phonetics and phonology, 43–70.
   Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Krakow, Rena A. 1999. Physiological organization of syllables: a review. Journal
   of Phonetics 27(1). 23–54.
Kruschke, John. 2013. Bayesian estimation supersedes the t test. Journal of Exper-
   imental Psychology 142(2). 573–603.




52
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


Kuznetsova, Alexandra, Per Bruun Brockhoff & Sofie Pødenphant Jensen Rune
   Haubo Bojesen Christensen. 2020. lmerTest: Tests in linear mixed effects models.
   Version 3.1-2, retrieved from http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lmerTest.
Ladefoged, Peter & Ian Maddieson. 1996. The sounds of the world’s languages.
   Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Lee-Kim, Sang-Im, Lisa Davidson & Sangjin Hwang. 2013. Morphological effects
   on the darkness of English intervocalic /l/. Laboratory Phonology 4(2). 475–511.
Lewin, Christopher. 2019. Aspects of the historical phonology of Manx. University
   of Edinburgh. (Doctoral dissertation).
Li, Min, Chandra Kambhamettu & Maureen Stone. 2005. Automatic contour
   tracking in ultrasound images. Clinical linguistics & phonetics 19(6-7). 545–554.
Liljencrants, Johan & Lindblom. 1972. Numerical simulation of vowel quality sys-
   tems: the role of perceptual contrast. Language 48(4). 839–862.
Lindblom, Björn. 1986. Phonetic universals in vowel systems. In John Ohala &
   Jeri Jaeger (eds.), Experimental phonology, 13–44. Orlando: Academic Press.
Lindblom, Björn. 1990. Explaining phonetic variation: a sketch of the h&h theory.
   In William Hardcastle & Alain Marchal (eds.), Speech production and speech
   modelling, 403–439. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lüdecke, Daniel, Mattan S. Ben-Shachar, Indrajeet Patil, Philip Waggoner & Do-
   minique Makowski. 2021. performance: an R package for assessment, compar-
   ison and testing of statistical models. Journal of Open Source Software 6(60).
   3139. DOI: 10.21105/joss.03139.
Makowski, Dominique, Mattan S. Ben-Shachar & Daniel Lüdecke. 2019.
   Bayestestr: describing effects and their uncertainty, existence and significance
   within the bayesian framework. Journal of Open Source Software 4(40). 1541.
   DOI: 10.21105/joss.01541. https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.01541.
Malmi, Anton, Pärtel Lippus & Einar Meister. 2023. Spectral and temporal proper-
   ties of Estonian palatalization. Journal of the International Phonetic Association
   53(3). 748–773. DOI: 0.1017/S0025100321000360.
Martinet, André. 1952. Function, structure, and sound change. Word 8(1). 1–32.
   DOI: 10.1080/00437956.1952.11659416.
Martinet, André. 1964. Économie des changements phonétiques: traité de phonolo-
   gie diachronique. Berne: A. Francke.
Matuschek, Hannes, Reinhold Kliegl, Shravan Vasishth, R. Harald Baayen & Dou-
   glas Bates. 2017. Balancing Type I error and power in linear mixed models.
   Journal of Memory and Language 94. 305–315. DOI: 10.1016/j.jml.2017.01.001.
McCone, Kim. 1996. Towards a relative chronology of ancient and medieval Celtic
   sound change. Maynooth, Ireland: The Cardinal Press.



                                                                                  53
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


Monahan, Philip & William Idsardi. 2010. Auditory sensitivity to formant ratios:
  toward an account of vowel normalisation. Language and Cognitive Processes
  25(6). 808–839.
Morey, Richard D. & Jeffrey N. Rouder. 2023. BayesFactor: Computation of Bayes
  Factors for Common Designs. R package version 0.9.12-4.5. https://CRAN.R-
  project.org/package=BayesFactor.
Mousikou, Petroula, Patrycja Strycharczuk, Alice Turk & James Scobbie. 2021.
  Coarticulation across morpheme boundaries: an ultrasound study of past-
  tense inflection in Scottish English. Journal of Phonetics 88. 101101.
Nam, Hosung, Louis Goldstein & Elliot Saltzman. 2009. Self-organization of syl-
  lable structure: a coupled oscillator model. In François Pellegrino, Egidio Mar-
  sico, Ioana Chitoran & Christophe Coupé (eds.), Approaches to phonological
  complexity, 297–328. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Nance, Claire & Roibeard Ó Maolalaigh. 2021. Scottish Gaelic. Journal of the In-
  ternational Phonetic Association 51(2). 261–275.
Ní Chasaide, Ailbhe. 1995. Irish. Journal of the International Phonetic Association
  25(1). 34–39.
Ní Chasaide, Ailbhe & Geraldine Fealy. 1991. A preliminary investigation of
  palatal/palatalised consonants of Irish. Unpublished ms.
Ní Chiosáin, Máire. 1991. Topics in the phonology of Irish. University of Mas-
  sachusetts, Amherst. (Doctoral dissertation).
Ní Chiosáin, Máire. 1994. Irish palatalisation and the representation of place fea-
  tures. Phonology 11(1). 89–106.
Ní Chiosáin, Máire. 1999. Syllables and phonotactics in Irish. In Harry van der
  Hulst & Nancy Ritter (eds.), The syllable: views and facts, 551–575. Berlin: Mou-
  ton de Gruyter.
Ní Chiosáin, Máire. To appear. Modern Irish phonology and phonetics. In J. Eska,
  P. Ó Muircheartaigh, P. Russell & S. Nurmio (eds.), Palgrave handbook of Celtic
  languages and linguistics. Palgrave Macmillan.
Ní Chiosáin, Máire & Jaye Padgett. 2012. An acoustic and perceptual study of
  Connemara Irish palatalization. Journal of the International Phonetic Associa-
  tion 42(2). 171–191.
Ó Siadhail, Mícheál. 1991. Modern Irish: grammatical structure and dialectal vari-
  ation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Oberpriller, Johannes, Melina de Souza Leite & Maximilian Pichler. 2022. Fixed
  or random? On the reliability of mixed-effects models for a small number of
  levels in grouping variables. Ecology and Evolution 12(7). e9062.




54
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


Ohala, John. 1981. The listener as a source of sound change. In Carrie S. Masek,
  Roberta A. Hendrick & Mary Frances Miller (eds.), Papers from the parasession
  on language and behavior, 178–203. Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society.
Ohala, John. 1990. The phonetics and phonology of aspects of assimilation. In
  John Kingston & Mary Beckman (eds.), Papers in laboratory phonology I: be-
  tween the grammar and the physics of speech, 258–275. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
  bridge University Press.
Ohala, John. 1993a. Coarticulation and phonology. Language and speech 36(2-3).
  155–170.
Ohala, John. 1993b. The phonetics of sound change. In Charles Jones (ed.), His-
  torical linguistics: problems and perspectives, 237–278. London: Longman.
Operstein, Natalie. 2010. Consonant structure and prevocalization. Consonant
  Structure and Prevocalization.
Padgett, Jaye, Ryan Bennett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik.
  2023. The timing of secondary dorsal articulations across syllable positions in
  Irish. In Radek Skarnitzl & Jan Volín (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International
  Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic 2023, 2209–2213. Prague:
  Guarant International. https://www.icphs2023.org/programme/proceedings/.
Padgett, Jaye & Scott Myers. 2014. Domain generalization in artificial language
  learning. Phonology 31(3). 399–433.
Padgett, Jaye & Máire Ní Chiosáin. 2018. The perception of a secondary palatal-
  ization contrast: a preliminary comparison of Russian and Irish. In Ryan Ben-
  nett, Adrian Brasoveanu, Dhyana Buckley, Nick Kalivoda, Shigeto Kawahara,
  Grant McGuire & Jaye Padgett (eds.), A festschrift for Junko Itô and Armin
  Mester. Santa Cruz, CA: Department of Linguistics, University of California,
  Santa Cruz. https://itomestercelebration.sites.ucsc.edu/.
Parrell, Benjamin. 2012. The role of gestural phasing in Western Andalusian Span-
  ish aspiration. Journal of Phonetics 40(1). 37–45.
Pinheiro, José & Douglas Bates. 2000. Mixed-effects models in S and S-PLUS. New
  York: Springer.
Proctor, Michael. 2009. Gestural characterization of a phonological class: the liq-
  uids. Yale. (Doctoral dissertation).
Purcell, Edward T. 1979. Formant frequency patterns in Russian VCV utterances.
  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 66(6). 1691–1702.
R Development Core Team. 2020. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
  Computing. Version 4.0.2, retrieved from http://www.R-project.org/. R Foun-
  dation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria.




                                                                                  55
Ryan Bennett, Jaye Padgett, Grant McGuire, Máire Ní Chiosáin & Jennifer Bellik


Recasens, Daniel. 1999. Lingual coarticulation. In William Hardcastle & Nigel
   Hewlett (eds.), Coarticulation: theory, data, and techniques, 80–104. Cambridge,
   UK: Cambridge University Press.
Recasens, Daniel & Aina Espinosa. 2009. An articulatory investigation of lin-
   gual coarticulatory resistance and aggressiveness for consonants and vowels
   in Catalan. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 125(4). 2288–2298.
   DOI: 10.1121/1.3089222.
Recasens, Daniel, Maria Dolors Pallarès & Jordi Fontdevila. 1997. A model of lin-
   gual coarticulation based on articulatory constraints. The Journal of the Acous-
   tical Society of America 102(1). 544–561. DOI: 10.1121/1.419727.
Recasens, Daniel & Clara Rodríguez. 2016. A study on coarticulatory resistance
   and aggressiveness for front lingual consonants and vowels using ultrasound.
   Journal of Phonetics 59. 58–75.
Scatton, Ernest. 1993. Bulgarian. In Greville Corbett & Bernard Comrie (eds.), The
   Slavonic languages, 188–248. London: Routledge.
Scobbie, James, Alan Wrench & Marietta van der Linden. 2008. Head-probe sta-
   bilisation in ultrasound tongue imaging using a headset to permit natural head
   movement. In Rudolph Sock, Susanne Fuchs & Yves Laprie (eds.), International
   seminar on speech production (ISSP) 8, 373–376. INRIA.
Shaw, Jason, Sejin Oh, Karthik Durvasula & Alexei Kochetov. 2021. Articula-
   tory coordination distinguishes complex segments from segment sequences.
   Phonology 38(3). 437–477. DOI: 10.1017/s0952675721000269.
Short, David. 1993. Czech. In Greville Corbett & Bernard Comrie (eds.), The
   Slavonic languages, 455–532. London: Routledge.
Silverman, Daniel. 1997. Laryngeal complexity in Otomanguean vowels. Phonol-
   ogy 14(2). 235–261.
Sproat, Richard & Osamu Fujimura. 1993. Allophonic variation in English /l/ and
   its implications for phonetic implementation. Journal of phonetics 21. 291–311.
Steriade, Donca. 2001. Directional asymmetries in place assimilation: a percep-
   tual account. In Keith Johnson & Elizabeth Hume (eds.), The role of speech
   perception in phonology, 219–250. New York: Academic Press.
Stevens, Kenneth N. & Dennis Klatt. 1974. Role of formant transitions in the
   voiced-voiceless distinction for stops. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
   America 55(3). 653–659.
Stifter, David. 2017. The phonology of Celtic. In Jared Klein, Brian Joseph,
   Matthias Fritz & Mark Wenthe (eds.), Handbook of comparative and historical
   Indo-European linguistics, 1188–1202. Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.




56
                              1 Gestural timing and contrast: an Irish case study


Stoll, Taja. 2017. Articulatory analysis of palatalised rhotics in Russian: implica-
   tions for sound change. Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München. (Doctoral
   dissertation).
Strycharczuk, Patrycja. 2019. Phonetic detail and phonetic gradience in morpho-
   logical processes. In Oxford research encyclopedia of linguistics. Oxford, UK:
   Oxford University Press. DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.616.
Sung, J-H, D. Archangeli, S. Johnston, I. Clayton, M. Fisher, M. Hammond &
  A. Carnie. 2018. Individual variation in lexical palatalization: articulatory evi-
   dence from Scottish Gaelic. Eoneohag 80. 23–51.
Takatori, Yuki. 1997. A study of constraint interaction in Slavic phonology. New
   Haven, CT: Yale University.
Ternes, Elmar. 2006. The phonemic analysis of Scottish Gaelic (3rd ed.) Dublin:
   Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies.
Tomaschek, Fabian, Peter Hendrix & R Harald Baayen. 2018. Strategies for ad-
   dressing collinearity in multivariate linguistic data. Journal of Phonetics 71.
   249–267.
Turk, Alice, Satsuki Nakai & Mariko Sugahara. 2006. Acoustic segment durations
   in prosodic research: a practical guide. In Stefan Sudhoff, Denisa Lenertova,
   Roland Meyer, Sandra Pappert, Petra Augurzky, Ina Mleinek, Nicole Richter &
  Johannes Schließer (eds.), Methods in empirical prosody research, 1–28. Berlin:
   De Gruyter.
Turton, Danielle. 2017. Categorical or gradient? An ultrasound investigation of
  /l/-darkening and vocalization in varieties of English. Laboratory Phonology
   8(1). 13. DOI: 10.5334/labphon.35.
Wrench, Alan. 2008. Ultrasound Stabilisation Headset users manual. Version 1.5.
  Articulate Instruments Ltd.
Wright, Richard. 1996. Consonant clusters and cue preservation in tsou. UCLA.
  (Doctoral dissertation).
Wright, Richard. 2004. A review of perceptual cues and cue robustness. In
   Bruce Hayes, Robert Kirchner & Donca Steriade (eds.), Phonetically based
   phonology, 34–57. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. DOI: 10.1017/
   cbo9780511486401.002.




                                                                                 57
