                                     An ultrasound study of Connemara Irish
                                               palatalization and velarization
                                                                                                                        Ryan Bennett
                                                                            Department of Linguistics, University of California, Santa Cruz
                                                                                                                      rbennett@ucsc.edu

                                                                                                                  Máire Nı́ Chiosáin
                                                                  School of Languages, Cultures and Linguistics, University College Dublin
                                                                                                                maire.nichiosain@ucd.ie

                                                                                                                         Jaye Padgett
                                                                            Department of Linguistics, University of California, Santa Cruz
                                                                                                                      padgett@ucsc.edu

                                                                                                                      Grant McGuire
                                                                            Department of Linguistics, University of California, Santa Cruz
                                                                                                                     gmcguir1@ucsc.edu




       We present the first ultrasound analysis of the secondary palatalization contrast in Irish,
       analyzing data from five speakers from the Connemara dialect group. Word-initial /pʲ(bʲ)
       pˠ(bˠ) tʲ tˠ kʲ kˠ fʲ fˠ sʲ sˠ xʲ xˠ/ are analyzed in the context of /iː uː/. We find, first,
       that tongue body position robustly distinguishes palatalized from velarized consonants,
       across place of articulation, manner, and vowel place contexts, with palatalized consonants
       having fronter and/or higher tongue body realizations than their velarized counterparts.
       This conclusion holds equally for labial consonants, contrary to some previous descriptive
       claims. Second, the nature and degree of palatalization and velarization depend in systematic
       ways on consonant place and manner. In coronal consonants, for example, velarization is
       weaker or absent. Third, the Irish consonants examined resist coarticulation in backness
       with a following vowel. In all of these respects Irish palatalization is remarkably similar
       to that of Russian. Our results also support an independent role for pharyngeal cavity
       expansion/retraction in the production of the palatalization contrast. Finally, we discuss
       preliminary findings on the dynamics of the secondary articulation gestures. Our use of
       principal component analysis (PCA) in reaching these findings is also of interest, since
       PCA has not been employed a great deal in analyses of tongue body movement.



1 Introduction
Irish is well known for its use of contrastive secondary palatalization and velarization. There
are many pairs like bán /bˠaːnˠ/ ‘white’ vs. beann /bʲaːnˠ/ ‘peak’ which demonstrate that

Journal of the International Phonetic Association, page 1 of 44                                      
                                                                                                     C International Phonetic Association
doi:10.1017/S0025100317000494
2   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



the contrast between palatalized and velarized consonants is phonemic in the language. This
distinction pervades virtually the entire consonant system; it is found in all word positions
including word-finally, and it can have grammatical significance, as in cat /kˠatˠ/ ‘cat (SG)’
vs. cait /kˠatʲ/ ‘cat (PL)’. The impressionistic realization of palatalization and velarization
depends on several factors discussed in this paper. For consistency we will always transcribe
both.
    Though secondary palatalization contrasts are well known, our understanding of the
articulatory facts behind them is limited. This is true even for better-studied languages with
phonemic palatalization, such as Russian, where until recently articulatory data on a given
sound was often limited to X-ray tracings of very few tokens produced by very few speakers
(Fant 1960, Bolla 1981; see discussion in Proctor 2009: 124–125). It is all the more true of
Irish, for which there are only a few electropalatographic studies (Farnetani et al. 1991, Nı́
Chasaide & Fealy 1991).
    In this paper we present the first ultrasound study of Irish, focusing on the realization
of tongue body position in the secondary palatalization and velarization contrast. Unlike
electropalatography, ultrasound imaging can provide direct information about tongue body
shape and movement, which is crucial to an understanding of palatalization and velarization.
Our data come from a variety of Connacht Irish spoken in Connemara, in the west of Ireland.
Our primary aim is to understand the role of the tongue body and root in the Irish palatalization
contrast, focusing on word-initial position, and to explore how the contrast depends on place
of articulation, manner (plosive vs. fricative) and vowel backness (/iː/ vs. /uː/). As we will see,
our results indicate an independent role for tongue root advancement and retraction in the
production of the Irish contrast. In addition, we discuss preliminary findings on the dynamics
of the palatalization contrast.
    Throughout this paper we illustrate our core results with tongue shape plots which estimate
the characteristic tongue body position for each speaker and each consonant (palatalized or
velarized), broken down by consonantal place and manner, and vowel place (see Section 3.6.1
for details). These plots are derived from several repetitions of each item for each speaker.
We provide representative diagrams when needed for illustration. The rest of the tongue
shape plots, and the processed raw data from which they are derived, can be found through
our project website, https://irishpalatals.sites.ucsc.edu. The permanent link to the materials is
http://n2t.net/ark:/b7291/d1wc74.




2 Background
2.1 Irish
Irish (or Gaeilge) has a good deal of Irish state support. Nevertheless, Irish is a minority
language in Ireland and could be regarded as highly endangered. According to a recent
government strategy document, ‘Irish is the main community and household language of 3%
of the country’s population’ (Government of Ireland 2010). This would put the number
of such speakers at roughly 137,000. However, many sources estimate fewer speakers.
According to the 2011 Irish census, only 1.8% of the population (roughly 72,000 speakers)
reported speaking Irish daily outside of the education system (Central Statistics Office
2012). A recent report by Údarás na Gaeltachta emphasizes that the Irish language is
at risk of marginalization even in traditional Irish-speaking communities (Ó Giollagáin &
Charlton 2015).
     On the other hand, a much larger proportion of the Irish population reports some fluency
in the language. Indeed, there are many more people learning and speaking Irish as a second
language than as a first language, in Ireland as well as elsewhere, and such learners may
constitute the future of the language (McCloskey 2001, 2008). Since the phonemic contrast
                                                                                         Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   3




         Figure 1 Gaeltachtaı́ (Irish speaking areas) of Ireland (shaded), following the 2011 Republic of Ireland census.


between palatalized and velarized consonants characterizes most of the consonant inventory,
it poses one of the fundamental challenges for second language learners of Irish. It should
also be noted that the palatalization contrast is itself endangered and waning in the speech
of younger speakers, even in Irish speaking communities, probably at least in part due to
the heavy influence of English (Ó Béarra 2007, Ó Curnáin 2007, Péterváry et al. 2014;
see also Nance 2014 on Scottish Gaelic). These observations underscore the importance of
documentation of the contrast in the traditional dialects.
    The shaded portions of Figure 1 show the Gaeltachtaı́ – areas where Irish is spoken
as a community language – of the Republic of Ireland, based on census data of 2011. It
is conventional to distinguish three major dialects of Irish, those of Ulster, Connacht, and
Munster. Connemara is within the Connacht dialect area and lies to the west of the city of
Galway. Our recordings for this dialect were made in Casla.
    The consonant phoneme inventory of Connemara Irish is given in (1) (de Bhaldraithe
1945, Ó Siadhail 1991, Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2012, see the latter for discussion).

(1)   Connemara Irish phonemic consonant inventory
                 Labial Coronal       Dorsal       Glottal
                        j       j            j
      Stop      pˠ p      tˠ t       kˠ     k
                bˠ bj dˠ dj          ɡˠ     ɡj
      Fricative fˠ    fj  sˠ sj      xˠ     xj     hˠ (hj )
                        j                      j
                vˠ v                 (ɣˠ) (ɣ )
      Nasal     mˠ mj nˠ nj          ŋˠ     ŋj
      Liquid              lˠ lj
                          rˠ rj

Palatalized and velarized consonants are marked with a superscript j and ɣ respectively. The
‘voiceless’ and ‘voiced’ stops are generally realized as voiceless-aspirated and voiceless-
unaspirated respectively, though we retain the usual transcriptions. The Connemara vowel
system can be roughly described as /i e a o u/, each occurring in long and short form. Irish
/sʲ/ is realized as [ʃ] or [ɕ], though we represent this sound as /sʲ/ to emphasize that it patterns
phonologically with the other palatalized consonants. Sounds enclosed in parentheses have
highly restricted distributions.
4     Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




2.2 Palatalization and velarization
2.2.1 Introduction
We use the term ‘(secondary) palatalization’ here to refer to a [j]- or [i]-like gesture
accompanying a primary consonantal place gesture (International Phonetic Association 1999:
17). Non-palatalized consonants are typically velarized in Irish. Velarization might likewise
be described, at least impressionistically, as a [ɰ]- or [ɯ]-like gesture accompanying the
primary gesture, though we employ the conventional notation /Cˠ/. (See below for details on
the articulatory realization of these sounds.) The descriptive grammatical literature on Irish is
consistent with this general understanding: ‘slender’ (palatalized) consonants are described
as having a secondary articulation of the tongue resembling that of a high front vowel, ‘broad’
(velarized) consonants as having one resembling a high back vowel (de Bhaldraithe 1945,
Breatnach 1947, Mhac an Fhailigh 1980). The Irish dialectology literature also reports some
systematic phonetic variation for these secondary dorsal articulations; we return to these
claims throughout the paper.
    Forms illustrating the palatalization contrast are given in (2). As the contrasts in (3) show,
the presence or absence of palatalization can mark morpho-syntactic distinctions.

(2)       Secondary palatalization in Connemara Irish
          beann         /bʲaːnˠ/           ‘peak’                        bán    /bˠaːnˠ/     ‘white’
          peann         /pʲaːnˠ/           ‘pen’                         pán    /pˠaːnˠ/     ‘pawnshop’
          bráid        /bˠrˠaːdʲ/         ‘neck, throat’                brád   /bˠrˠaːdˠ/   ‘drizzle’
          scáil        /sˠkˠaːlʲ/         ‘shadow’                      scál   /sˠkˠaːlˠ/   ‘supernatural being’
(3)       Palatalization encodes grammatical distinctions
          cait     /kˠatʲ/    ‘cat (PL)’        cat     /kˠatˠ/                               ‘cat (SG)’
          báid    /bˠaːdʲ/   ‘boat (NOM.PL)/ bád      /bˠaːdˠ/                              ‘boat (NOM.SG)/
                              (GEN.SG)’                                                       (GEN.PL)’
     Compared to their velarized counterparts, Irish palatalized consonants have raised second
formants in CV and VC transitions (Nı́ Chasaide 1990, Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2012). The
noise following the burst of palatalized plosives is louder, longer, and higher in spectral center
of gravity, particularly for coronals when compared to labials, (Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2012).
In both the articulatory and acoustic respects described above, Irish palatalized and velarized
consonants resemble those of Russian. (See Kochetov 2006, Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2012 and
references therein.)
     Though we transcribe palatalization and velarization everywhere for consistency, it is
important to understand that the impressionistic, auditory realization of both secondary
articulations depends on phonetic context. In particular, velarization is not auditorily salient
preceding back vowels, e.g. beo [bʲoː] ‘alive’ vs. bó [boː] (rather than [bˠoː]) ‘cow’.
Analogously, palatalization is not always auditorily salient preceding front vowels, e.g. bı́
[biː] (rather than [bʲiː]) ‘be (IMP)’ vs. [bˠiː] ‘yellow’ (Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2001, 2012). The
latter fact is true especially for labials. Palatalization is more auditorily salient in coronals and
velars, even around front vowels, because it is often accompanied by characteristic differences
in the release burst or frication noise, as mentioned above. On the other hand, velarization has
been characterized as comparatively weak for the coronals, particularly the coronal stops. For
example, Mhac an Fhailigh (1980: 24) reports that velarized /tˠ dˠ nˠ/ are produced with a
centralized, [ə]-like dorsal constriction rather than the high [ɰ]- or [ɯ]-like gesture normally
associated with velarized consonants.
     Those nuances aside, palatalization before a back vowel, as in [bʲuː], is impressionistically
obvious, as is velarization before a front vowel, as in [bˠiː]. (Readers interested in hearing
the pronunciations of these and other forms can access the data through the link given in the
introduction.) The effects on the second vowel formant can be seen in Figure 2, which shows
                                                                                     Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   5




          Figure 2 (Colour online) Plots of F1 and F2 trajectories, with Loess smoothing lines, for [bʲuː] (left) and [bˠiː] (right),
                   Speaker 1.


formant transitions (over seven repetitions with Loess smoothing lines) for productions of
[bʲuː] and [bˠiː] spoken by Speaker 1 of our study.
     Lastly, traditional Irish dialect descriptions leave room for doubt as to whether labial
consonants are in fact produced with secondary dorsal constrictions. Many dialect descriptions
do not comment on the position of the tongue body during the production of labials (e.g.
Breatnach 1947, de Búrca 1958, Stockman 1974). Sommerfelt’s (1922: 31–22) description
of a Donegal (Northern) dialect does suggest that the tongue body is further back for /bˠ/
than for /bʲ/, but also claims that the dorsum is in a ‘neutral position’ for /bʲ/, rather than
fronted. Furthermore, the phonological contrast between palatalized and velarized labial
consonants is sometimes characterized as a contrast in lip rounding rather than tongue body
position (Quiggin 1906, Breatnach 1947, Ó Siadhail 1991, Nı́ Chasaide 1995). For example,
Ó Siadhail (1991: 83) states that ‘slender [palatalized] labials are hardly ever phonetically
palatalized’, and Breatnach (1947) writes ‘in forming the [palatalized bilabial] stop the lips
are rather spread, and are kept close to the teeth’. Ó Cuı́v (1944), Mhac an Fhailigh (1980), and
de Bhaldraithe (1945) all suggest that palatalized and velarized labials combine a distinction
in lip-rounding with the same dorsal movements found at other places of articulation (at least
in the south and west Gaeltacht areas). However, these claims are strictly impressionistic in
nature, and as far as we know the production of labial consonants in Irish has never been
investigated with instrumental methods. One goal of this paper, then, is to examine the position
of the tongue body during labial consonants directly using articulatory imaging techniques.

2.2.2 Previous articulatory studies of secondary palatalization contrasts
In this section we summarize previous instrumental research on the articulation of secondary
palatalization contrasts in Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Russian. We begin with Russian, which
we discuss here for two reasons. First, the Russian palatalization contrast is impressionistically
very much like that of Irish, and so these articulatory studies are relevant background to the
present paper. Second, we are interested in how closely the Irish and Russian palatalization
6   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



contrasts resemble one another, since this may tell us something about universal constraints
on such a contrast.
     Skalozub (1963) presents palatograms and X-ray tracings of four Russian speakers,
including juxtapositions of palatalized and non-palatalized versions of the same consonant.
Skalozub’s consonantal data are in the context of the vowel /a/, usually /a_a/. There is
a consistent and robust difference in tongue body backness between palatalized and non-
palatalized versions of a sound, judging (for example) by the highest point of the tongue
body. Skalozub concludes that palatalized sounds involve an active raising and fronting of
the tongue body. For non-palatalized labials, she concludes (p. 55) that there is active tongue
backing, i.e. velarization; the back of the tongue is also high. (See also Kedrova et al. 2009.)
She does not suggest active tongue backing in the case of non-palatalized coronals, and the
tongue body is also less high for these sounds. Non-palatalized velars have a high, back
tongue body, but it is not obvious how much of this can be attributed to an active velarization
gesture rather than to the primary velar constriction itself. All of these observations seem true
of Matusevich & Liubimova’s (1963) X-ray data as well.
     Based on an EMMA analysis of several Russian speakers uttering nonsense words
containing /p pʲ t tʲ/ in the context /a__a/, Kochetov (2002) also concludes that palatalization
involves active tongue body raising and fronting. He describes non-palatalized /p/ as ‘partially
velarized’, with active backing but not raising (p. 72), but non-palatalized /t/ as unspecified
for any tongue body gesture. In fact, Kochetov finds that this sound is slightly fronted (but
still significantly backed compared to /tʲ/); however, it should be borne in mind that this is in
relation to the tongue body position for /a/.
     Proctor (2009) examines the tongue body properties of palatalized and non-palatalized /r
l d/ in Russian, based on ultrasound data for four speakers. Proctor’s data are in the context
of the vowels /u a e/, using nonsense words. Proctor concludes that the tongue dorsum of
non-palatalized /d/ adopts the position of the neighboring vowel and that this sound therefore
has no tongue body target, similarly to Kochetov. Proctor describes the tongue body gesture
of non-palatalized /r/ as ‘mid-central’ and that of /l/ as ‘mid-back’.
     Although most sources on the production of the Russian contrast define palatalization
and velarization in terms of tongue body position, Fant (1960: 171, 219–223) describes them
as ‘the presence versus absence of a tendency towards a narrowing in the region of the uvula,
and in the upper part of the pharynx’, and calls non-palatalized consonants ‘pharyngealized’.
On the one hand, there is reason to doubt that a palatalization contrast should be identified
primarily with a pharyngeal constriction. Its most robust correlate is the second formant at the
consonant-vowel transition (Jakobson, Fant & Halle 1952, Halle 1959, Purcell 1979, Kochetov
2006). The articulatory correlate of the second formant (apart from the lips) is the location
of the tongue body constriction in the oral cavity (see e.g. Stevens 1998 on the articulatory
correlates of the vowel formants). Studies of pharyngeal and uvular consonants, as well as the
[ATR] contrast, find robust effects on the first formant but no consistent effect on the second
formant (Alwan 1986, 1989: Ladefoged & Maddieson 1996; Tiede 1996; Borroff 2007: 155).
In addition, any effect of palatalization on the first vowel formant might be explained at least in
part as a side-effect on the pharyngeal cavity of raising and fronting the tongue (Stevens 1998:
263). Finally, Ladefoged & Maddieson (1996: 188) note that ‘phonological palatalization is
not always accompanied by a big difference in pharynx width’. On the other hand, there is a
consistent effect of a palatalization contrast on the first formant (e.g. Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett
2012: 172 and references there), and none of the above rules out a role for the pharyngeal cavity
in a palatalization contrast. As it turns out, our analysis to come indeed finds an independent
role for tongue root advancement and retraction in the palatalization contrast in Irish.
     A persistent question in the literature on Russian palatalization involves the prevalence or
existence of velarization compared to palatalization (see discussion in Kochetov 2002: 58–59;
Proctor 2009: 124–125). While palatalized sounds always involve tongue body raising and
fronting, the tongue body realizations of non-palatalized sounds may be more variable, a
possibility suggested by Kedrova et al. (2008). Labial consonants seem to have more robust
                                                                      Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   7




velarization than coronals, as discussed above. In addition, velarization may depend on vowel
context, and it is noteworthy that almost all of the studies cited above examine the contrast only
in the context of /a/. While velarization may be weak (at least for some sounds) in that context,
with the tongue body assuming something like the position of the vowel, this is clearly not the
case before front vowels, where velarization of non-palatalized consonants is highly audible
(Padgett 2001, 2010), as noted earlier. Padgett (2001) and Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett (2012)
argue that the opposition in Russian and Irish between palatalized and velarized consonants,
as opposed to palatalized vs. plain, is a matter of contrast dispersion.
     Sung et al. (2013, 2014) present ultrasound analyses of palatalized vs. non-palatalized
/p t l r/ (2013) and /p t k l n/ (2014) in Scottish Gaelic, a language closely related to
Irish. They analyze four (2013) and six (2014) speakers from the Isle of Skye, presenting
SSANOVA tongue shape plots (see Section 3.6.1 on these) derived from manual tracings
at the tongue body gestural peak.1 Sung et al. find a clear difference between palatalized
and non-palatalized obstruents, the tongue body of the palatalized consonants being fronter
and sometimes higher than that of non-palatalized ones. Though they do not discuss it,
the difference in backness for /t/ seems smaller, consistent with findings for Russian. Sung
et al. largely find no differences between palatalized and non-palatalized /l r n/. However, they
compare phonemically palatalized /t l/ with /t l/ having morphologically derived palatalization
(analogous to that seen in (3) above for Irish), the latter occurring only word-finally, and find
that morphologically palatalized /l/ has a fronter tongue body for three out of four speakers,
but the two kinds of /t/ are not distinct. Sung et al. find no clear difference between word-initial
and word-final instances of these palatalized consonants.2
     There are no previous articulatory studies of the Irish palatalization contrast that involve
direct imaging of the tongue body, the articulator thought to be most relevant to the
palatalization contrast. However, using EPG, Farnetani et al. (1991) examine Irish /tˠ tʲ sˠ sʲ
nˠ nʲ lˠ lʲ kˠ kʲ/ produced by one speaker in the context of /i u a/. The authors note that this
speaker does not actually produce the palatalization contrast for the sonorants, so only their
findings regarding the obstruents are helpful for our purposes. Of these, the authors note that
/sʲ kʲ/ involve tongue predorsum raising, and both show a good deal of tongue dorsum contact;
/kʲ/ is described as palatal. In addition, the Farnetani et al. (1991) data suggest that some Irish
consonants, especially /tʲ kˠ kʲ/, resist coarticulation with neighboring vowels compared to
similar consonants in Catalan or Italian, and they relate this fact to the existence of contrastive
palatalization in Irish. In a separate EPG study focusing on coarticulation, Nı́ Chasaide &
Fealy (1991) examine /bˠ bʲ dˠ dʲ ɡˠ ɡʲ/ of one speaker between long vowels and conclude that
the consonants show less articulatory and acoustic coarticulation with vowels than similar
consonants in French, Italian, and Swedish. (Their EPG data excluded the labials.) What little
coarticulation there is is carryover (perseveratory) and is stronger at the onset of the consonant
than at the offset. The authors conclude that Irish supports the hypothesis that consonants
resist coarticulation more when there are more consonantal contrasts (e.g. Öhman 1966).
     The purpose of our ultrasound study is to provide direct evidence about the behavior of
the tongue body in the Irish palatalization contrast. We examine three places of articulation,
including labials, which were not included in Farnetani et al.’s (1991) study. Our data is based
on multiple speakers producing multiple repetitions in highly controlled contexts, and unlike
Sung et al. (2013, 2014) we provide a quantitative analysis of tongue backness and height
differences. Though we employ only two vowel contexts /iː uː/, these vowels represent the most
extreme degrees of backness/frontness and so make good touchstones for gauging tongue body
backing/fronting and the degree of coarticulation between consonants and vowels. Finally,

1
  Sung et al. do not provide information about the phonetic context of the sounds analyzed, such as the
  quality of the adjacent vowels. It should also be noted that Scottish Gaelic is often characterized as
  lacking a true phonetic palatalization contrast for labial consonants, pace Sung et al. (2013, 2014) (e.g.
  Borgstrøm 1940, 1941; Bosch 2010).
2
  The exception may be /r/, but the differences in this case are not very consistent.
8     Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



this study is part of a larger project using ultrasound data to investigate the palatalization
contrast in all three major Irish dialects, Ulster, Connacht (represented here), and Munster.

2.3 Goals of the study
A basic goal of this work is to document the tongue body and tongue root postures that realize
the palatalization contrast. In addition, we posit the following specific research questions and
hypotheses, motivated by the studies discussed above and by impressionistic descriptions of
Irish:
(4) Hypotheses
    a. Tongue Body Hypothesis: Tongue body position consistently and sufficiently
       distinguishes palatalized from non-palatalized consonants at all places of articulation.
       Palatalized consonants are fronted and possibly raised compared to velarized
       consonants.
    b. Coronal Hypothesis: Velarization is weaker in coronals than in labials and
       dorsals.
    c. Coarticulation Resistance Hypothesis: Tongue body position does not vary greatly
       with vowel context, unlike in languages with no palatalization contrast.


3 Method
3.1 Speakers
Our five speakers were all broadcasters for RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta (the national
broadcaster’s Irish medium radio station), working in the station located in Casla, Connemara,
where the recordings were made (see Figure 1 above). A choice of radio broadcasters for
speakers might seem unusual. However, the sociolinguistic context of Irish is one in which
the native speaker base is rapidly declining, younger native speakers in the Gaeltacht are
becoming more English dominant (Péterváry et al. 2014), and native speakers can be insecure
in contexts where they feel that their Irish is being evaluated. The speakers for this study
represent a relatively traditional Irish and are comfortable with sound technology and speaking
while being recorded. They were two women and three men all between 35 and 60 years of age
(mean = 49 years). They were all native speakers of Connemara Irish and lived in Connemara,
and all of them used primarily Irish in their daily interactions. Both parents of all but one
speaker were native speakers of Connemara Irish. In that one case, the speaker’s mother was
a native English speaker. All speakers’ primary schooling was through the medium of Irish.
All but one speaker’s secondary schooling was through the medium of Irish. All speakers
attended third level colleges. All reported reading Irish on a daily basis. None reported any
difficulties in hearing, speaking, or reading.

3.2 Materials
The materials were designed to allow us to investigate the realization of the palatalization
contrast as a function of consonantal place, manner (plosive vs. fricative) and vowel context
(/iː/ vs. /uː/). Speakers read a pseudorandomized list of 24 Irish words, with target consonants
appearing word-initially in a CV(C) syllable. Target consonants were /pˠ (bˠ) pʲ (bʲ) fˠ fʲ tˠ
tʲ sˠ sʲ kˠ kʲ xˠ xʲ/. The consonants /bʲ bˠ/ were sometimes used instead of /pʲ pˠ/ because
word-initial /pʲ pˠ/ have a limited occurrence in Irish for historical reasons.3 Each consonant
appeared before both /iː/ and /uː/, which are pronounced [iː] and [uː]. The backness of short

3
    Word-initial voiced stops are realized as plain voiceless in Irish, as noted in Section 2.1 above. This should
    mitigate any possible deformation of the tongue dorsum caused by voicing during closure (Perkell 1969:
    21, 27).
                                                                                                 Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization     9




Table 1 Word list.




Table 2 Repetitions captured by speaker and word (only initial CV shown). Average number of repetitions overall = 6.1; by speaker: 6.7 (s1), 8.0 (s2),
        5.9 (s3), 6.0 (s4), 4.0 (s5).
Speaker    /bɣ iː/     /pj iː/    /pɣ uː/      /bj uː/     /f ɣ iː/    /f j iː/   /f ɣ uː/    /f j uː/     /tɣ iː/    /tj iː/    /tɣ uː/      /tj uː/
s1         7           6          7            7           6           6          7           5            7          7          7            6
s2         8           7          8            8           8           8          8           8            8          8          8            8
s3         6           6          6            6           6           5          6           6            6          6          6            6
s4         6           6          6            6           6           6          6           6            6          6          6            6
s5         4           4          4            4           4           4          4           4            4          4          4            4
Avg        6.2         5.8        6.2          6.2         6.0         5.8        6.2         5.8          6.2        6.2        6.2          6.0
Speaker    /sɣ iː/     /sj iː/    /sɣ uː/      /sj uː/     /kɣ iː/     /kj iː/    /kɣ uː/     /kj uː/      /xɣ iː/    /xj iː/    /xɣ uː/      /xj uː/
s1         6           7          7            7           7           7          6           7            7          7          7            7
s2         8           8          8            8           8           8          8           8            8          8          8            8
s3         6           6          6            6           6           6          6           6            6          6          6            5
s4         6           6          6            6           6           6          6           6            6          6          6            6
s5         4           4          4            4           4           4          4           4            4          4          4            4
Avg        6.0         6.2        6.2          6.2         6.2         6.2        6.0         6.2          6.2        6.2        6.2          6.0



vowels is largely determined by neighboring consonants in Irish (Ó Siadhail 1991, Nı́ Chiosáin
1994), though we abstract away from this fact in our transcriptions; using long [iː uː] allows us
to explore the effect of vowel quality on the realization of palatalization. Words appeared in
the carrier phrase Scairt Aoife _____ Dé Céadaoin [sˠkˠartʲ iːfˠə _____ dʲeː kʲeːdˠiːnʲ] ‘Aoife
shouted ___ on Wednesday’. Tautosyllabic codas, if they occurred, were non-palatalized
coronal consonants except in the case of /fʲiːsʲ/ ([fʲiːʃ]) ‘vision’ and /xˠiːnʲ/. The full list of
words used is given in Table 1. As noted earlier, /sʲ/ is realized as [ʃ] or [ɕ].
    Speakers read through the list 6–8 times, for a total of 144–192 productions (between
4 and 8 useable repetitions, depending on speaker and item). No two successive stimuli
began with a consonant of the same major place. The number of repetitions varied because
some participants became fatigued or had to end the session early for other reasons, and
because some tokens were too poorly captured to analyze. Table 2 summarizes the number of
repetitions captured by speaker and word.
10   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




3.3 Procedure
Ultrasound data was collected using a Terason T3000 ultrasound system with a model 8MC3
probe. The ultrasound machine recorded video at a frame rate of 58–60 frames per second,
giving a temporal error of 8.3–8.6 ms; this corresponds to one new image roughly every 17
ms. The probe was mounted in an Articulate Instruments Ultrasound Stabilization Headset
(Wrench 2008), which was worn by the speakers throughout the experiment. (See Scobbie,
Wrench & van der Linden 2008 for validation of this headset for probe stabilization.) Acoustic
data was collected simultaneously using a Shure WH20 dynamic cardioid microphone
attached to the headset, recording directly to the ultrasound system (which includes a laptop
computer) at a 44.1 kHz sampling rate. We also captured lip movement using video, though
lip movement data are not analyzed here. Each recording session lasted about one hour.

3.4 Articulatory to acoustic alignment
For each token we used the release of a velar stop in the carrier phrase (the /kɣ / in
‘scairt’ /sɣ kɣ artʲ/) to align the ultrasound video with its corresponding audio recording.
(See discussion in Miller & Finch 2011: 476.) Specifically, using the Adobe Premiere video
editing platform, the /kɣ / release burst in the acoustic signal was aligned by hand with the
first ultrasound frame after the velar closure; the latter was defined as the first frame after
the onset of the closure gesture that showed either downward movement of the tongue body
or ‘de-flattening’ of the tongue body as it moved away from the palate. Due to limitations
of frame rate, and because the defined ultrasound frame is not guaranteed to correspond to
the moment of audible release, this alignment is approximate and variable. References to
consonantal ‘onset, midpoint, offset’ throughout this paper should be understood with this in
mind.

3.5 Data capture
Using EdgeTrak software (Li, Kambhamettu & Stone 2005), the tongue surface shape was
captured as 100 points at three time landmarks for each token: consonantal onset, offset,
and the midpoint between them. Consonantal onset and offset were judged using landmarks
in the waveform and spectrogram of the audio signal. These landmarks for fricatives were
determined using the drop in amplitude from the preceding vowel and rise into the following
vowel as determined from the waveform and higher formants; the onset and offset of aperiodic
energy in the spectrogram served as a secondary criterion. Stop onsets were determined
primarily by the drop in amplitude from the preceding vowel, while offsets were marked
at the beginning of the stop release burst. In cases of uncertainty the choice was generally
made to err in the direction of smaller consonant duration so as to minimize the possibility
of including vocalic information as part of the consonant.
     Since the temporal dynamics of the palatalization contrast are not the main focus of this
paper, the analyses here are based primarily on one consonantal landmark, and for this purpose
we chose the consonantal offset. Prior research suggests that secondary palatalization and
velarization gestures peak at consonantal offset, at least for consonants in word- or syllable-
initial position (e.g. Ladefoged & Maddieson 1996: Chapter 10; Kochetov 2002, 2006). Our
brief discussion of dynamics in Section 4.7 may support this view, at least for palatalization.

3.6 Quantitative analysis
3.6.1 Fitting curves to tongue traces
Addressing our three hypotheses in (4) above requires, first, a means of establishing
characteristic tongue shapes for each kind of sound. To this end, the 4–8 tongue surface
tracings acquired for each target word, for each speaker, were submitted to smoothing spline
ANOVA (SSANOVA, Gu 2002, Davidson 2006) to find a best-fit curve across repetitions.
                                                                                     Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   11




         Figure 3 (Colour online) SSANOVA curve for palatalized (dashed) vs. velarized (solid) /bʲ pˠ/ at consonantal offset before /uː/,
                  Speaker 1. Front of the mouth is to the right.


These best-fit curves can be interpreted as characteristic tongue shapes for a particular
speaker’s production of each consonant type. The final output of the SSANOVA algorithm is
a curve consisting of a string of points separated by 0.01 mm on the x-axis, with associated
standard errors corresponding to y-axis variability at each point. We use these standard errors
to estimate 95% Bayesian confidence intervals around each curve. An example plot can be
seen in Figure 3, which shows Speaker 1’s estimated tongue curves for /bʲ pˠ/ before /uː/.
In our SSAVOVA figures, the front of the mouth is to the right. The dotted lines represent
the 95% Bayesian confidence intervals around the tongue position. Where the confidence
intervals of two lines do not overlap, we may assume that the tongue curves are significantly
different. All SSANOVA curves were computed using the GSS package (Gu 2013) in the R
statistical software environment (R Development Core Team 2013).
     As is often the case in ultrasound analyses of the vocal tract, neither the tongue tip nor
root is as well imaged as the tongue body. This, as well as the SSANOVA technique itself,
make the extremities of the SSANOVA curves less reliable. The apparent upward curve seen
in the tongue root of /pˠ/ in Figure 3, for example, and in some of our later curves does
not reflect the actual, physical tongue shape in that region. This means that extremities in
these curves should be interpreted with care. It is important to note as well that our principal
component analysis (next section), which is the primary basis for our major findings and
statistical comparisons, is done over the raw tongue tracing data, not over SSANOVA curves.

3.6.2 Principal component analysis
In order to address the Coronal Hypothesis and the Coarticulation Resistance Hypothesis
in (4) above, we need a way to analyze and quantify differences in tongue body shape and
position. Quantitative analysis of tongue shape variation was carried out using principal
component analysis (PCA). (See Jolliffe 2002 for an overview of PCA generally, and Johnson
2008: 95–102 for an accessible introduction to its use in linguistics; for PCA in the analysis
of tongue shapes see Harshman, Ladefoged & Goldstein 1977, Slud et al. 2002, Stone
2005, and references therein.) PCA is a statistical technique used in various fields to explore
clustering (structured covariation) in large data sets. PCA takes as its input a set of dimensions
characterizing a data set, such as the (x, y) coordinates which specify the shape and position of
the tongue contour for each ultrasound tracing in this study. PCA combines highly correlated
dimensions of variation into a set of linear predictors, or principal components (PCs). These
PCs are themselves weighted vectors of the original dimensions used to characterize the
12   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



data set, and are mathematically guaranteed to explain disjoint (orthogonal) portions of the
variance in the data. In this way PCA serves to reduce the dimensionality of a data set: most
of the variance in a given data set can typically be modelled using a far smaller number of
PCs than the original number of dimensions used to characterize the data. The first few PCs
– those accounting for a relatively large amount of the variance – can then be interpreted as
the primary dimensions of independent variation in the data.
     There are several advantages to using principal component analysis for the analysis of
ultrasound data. Because adjacent portions of the tongue tend to move in tandem, ultrasound
tracings show a great deal of structured covariation between adjacent points on the tongue
contour. PCA can effectively reduce this correlated variation to a set of parameters which
correspond to more readily interpretable, and more linguistically meaningful, changes in
the overall shape or position of the tongue contour. Second, PCA is unsupervised: the PCs
emerge from the data itself, rather than being specified a priori by the analyst. Third, PCA
operates over the entire tongue contour, and so takes advantage of the global information
about the tongue surface captured by ultrasound imaging. Finally, PCA can be computed
over the full set of raw tracings, and so does not require any prior smoothing or averaging of
the data.
     Several other methods for quantifying the data were also considered, but were found
to be less reliable or less informative than PCA. Some ultrasound research uses single-
point measurements taken from raw tracings or SSANOVA curves (e.g. Allen, Pulleyblank
& Ajı́bóyè 2013). A drawback of this methodology is a lack of consensus over how to
choose the measurement point(s) for any particular tracing or analysis; it also fails to take
advantage of the global information about the tongue surface provided by ultrasound imaging.
Zharkova (2013) proposes two promising metrics for quantifying dorsal position which avoid
the problems faced by single-point techniques and which have a number of other strengths.
However, Zharkova (2013) notes that these measures require consistent imaging of the tongue
tip and tongue root, something which can be difficult to achieve (e.g. Gick 2002, Stone 2005,
Miller 2016). Exploratory analysis using Zharkova’s metrics confirms a wider range of token-
to-token variation than PCA, most likely due to variation in tongue tip and root imaging
across repetitions and speakers within the present data set.
     The data set which served as the input to PCA included tongue contour tracings for all
repetitions of all target consonants, taken at consonantal onset, midpoint, and offset. It also
included tracings for 20 repetitions of the /a/ in scairt (one of the words in the frame sentence
used in elicitation) for each speaker, taken at the midpoint of the steady-state portion of the
vowel. The /a/ tracings were originally taken as a possible reference point for the analysis of
consonant articulation, but ultimately play no role in the analysis. The results of the PCA are
qualitatively the same when these vowel tracings are excluded from the analysis.
     The PCA began by converting each tongue contour in the data set into a 200-dimensional
vector. Each dimension represents the x or y value for one of the 100 points on the tongue
contour. A PCA was then computed on the basis of these vectors using the PRCOMP() function
in the R statistical software environment. As is standard practice in PCA, the input data was
standardized (centered and scaled) before the PCA was computed.

3.6.3 Centering with z-score transformation
The data set resulting from PCA includes some incidental speaker-specific variation: because
speakers have different vocal tract morphology, and because placement of the ultrasound
transducer varies somewhat across speakers and sessions, the tongue surface tracings are
not centered in the same region of the (x, y) space. To control for this incidental variation
the PC values for each speaker were re-centered using a z-score transformation (using the
SCALE() function in R) over the full data set for that speaker, that is, for every consonant
and repetition, at onset, midpoint, and offset, pooled together. (See Harrington et al. 2011,
Harrington, Hoole & Reubold 2012, and Shaw et al. 2014 for other examples of z-score
normalization as a technique for pooling dorsal position measurements across speakers, and
                                                              Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   13




see Miller 2016 for another approach to normalization of ultrasound data.) All subsequent
plotting and statistical analysis is based on these speaker-normalized z-scores.

3.6.4 Modeling
A statistical analysis of tongue shape variation was conducted through linear mixed-effects
modeling (Pinheiro & Bates 2000, Gelman & Hill 2007, Baayen, Davison & Bates 2008,
Bolker et al. 2009, among others). The analysis was carried out in R, using the LME4 package
(Bates, Maechler & Bolker 2011). The independent variables were speaker-normalized values
for the first three principal components discussed in the Results section: PC1–3, which we
interpret as corresponding to tongue body backness, tongue root advancement/retraction, and
tongue body height respectively (see Section 4.2).
     The analysis of PC1 (tongue backness) began with an initial model which included
fixed effects for MANNER (stop, fricative), MAJOR PLACE (labial, coronal, dorsal), SECONDARY
ARTICULATION (velarized, palatalized), and VOWEL CONTEXT (/Ciː/, /Cuː/), as well as all two-
way and three-way interactions between these terms. These factors were sum-coded to reduce
collinearity between simple predictors and their interactions.
     This initial model included a random intercept for speaker, along with by-speaker random
slopes for all of the fixed-effect predictors (Barr et al. 2013). This model failed to converge;
the random effects structure was then simplified by removing random slopes for all three-
way interactions, as well as the random slope for the two-way MAJOR PLACE × MANNER
interaction. This reduced model successfully converged. The random slope for the MAJOR
PLACE × MANNER interaction was eliminated from the model because removal of random
slopes for other two-way interactions did not bring the model to convergence.
     The fixed effects structure of this model was then reduced through a step-down model
selection procedure (see e.g. Gorman & Johnson 2013). Fixed-effects predictors were
eliminated sequentially: among the highest-order interactions still included in the model,
the predictor which accounted for the least variance in the data was selected for possible
removal. Using the likelihood ratio test, a reduced model omitting that predictor was then
compared to a superset model which included the predictor as a fixed effect. The significance
threshold for eliminating a predictor under the likelihood ratio test was p > .1. Lower-order
terms were retained until all higher-order terms containing them had been excluded.
     Models for PC2 (tongue root advancement/retraction) and PC3 (tongue height) were
fit using the same initial model and model selection procedure described above for PC1.
This linear mixed-effects modeling procedure resulted in final models for PC1–3 which are
provided in Tables A1–A3 of the appendix, along with further details about the models.



4 Results
4.1 SSANOVA curves
Figures 4–6 show Speaker 1’s estimated tongue curves for palatalized vs. velarized versions
of every consonant in each vowel context, at consonant offset. We refer back to these figures
in the following discussion.


4.2 The principal components
The first four PCs account for 92.5% of the total variance in the data set; these PCs are plotted
in Figure 7 in the original (x, y) space of the tongue surface tracings using the GGPLOT2
package (Wickham 2009). As in our SSANOVA plots, the front of the mouth is to the right.
    We interpret the first principal component (PC1), which captures 40.4% of the variance,
as corresponding to changes in tongue body frontness/backness (with concomitant changes of
the tongue root, discussed later). We interpret the third principal component (PC3, 14.7% of
14   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 4 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for palatalized (dashed) vs. velarized (solid) consonants at consonantal offset before /uː/
                     (left column) and /iː/ (right column), Speaker 1. Labials. Front of the mouth is to the right.



variance) as corresponding to changes in tongue body height. These two principal components
map fairly cleanly to the articulatory dimensions most often referenced in descriptions of
palatalization and velarization: tongue body backness and height. However, PC2, which
seems to indicate an independent role for tongue root advancement/retraction, accounts for
fully 30.0% of the data variance.
    It is possible that PC4 represents variation in tongue blade/tip orientation. As noted earlier,
however, the tongue tip was not reliably captured by our imaging and analysis. Because of
this, and because it accounts for only 7.4% of the variation in the data, we do not analyze
PC4.
    In the following sections, which are organized according to our guiding hypotheses in
0, we rely on the linear mixed-effects models shown in Tables A1–A3 of the appendix. All
pairwise comparisons reported in the text are for two-sided unpaired t-tests using the Welch
approximation to degrees of freedom.


4.3 Nature and consistency of the contrast
As can be seen in Figures 4–6, the tongue body positions differ significantly for all palatalized
vs. velarized consonants, in both vowel contexts, for Speaker 1. In particular, the tongue body
is fronted and/or raised in palatalized compared to velarized consonants. This difference
holds for every pair of palatalized vs. velarized consonants matched for place, manner, and
                                                                                       Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   15




         Figure 5 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for palatalized (dashed) vs. velarized (solid) consonants at consonantal offset before /uː/
                  (left column) and /iː/ (right column), Speaker 1. Coronals. Front of the mouth is to the right.



vowel context, for all five speakers. For example, Figure 8 shows the SSANOVA curves for
palatalized vs. velarized labial stops before the vowel /iː/, for all five speakers.
    Figure 9 shows violin plots summarizing normalized PC1 values, which we identify with
tongue body backness, for all speakers and consonants, collapsed over vowel context. These
violin plots include overlaid box plots showing the 25%–75% interquartile range, with black
diamonds and lines indicating the medians and means respectively. The separation in backness
of velarized /Cˠ/s from corresponding palatalized /Cʲ/s is evident in this figure, and confirmed
by a significant main effect for SECONDARY ARTICULATION (mean PC1 for /Cj / = 0.79, mean
PC1 for /Cɣ / = –0.50, t(696) = 21.23, p < .001). (Refer to Table A1 in the appendix for
the statistical model.) This contrast holds at each individual place of articulation (labials:
mean /Cj / = 0.82, mean /Cɣ / = –1.12, t(232) = 22.32, p < .001; coronals: mean /Cj / = 0.89,
mean /Cɣ / = 0.14, t(228) = 8.48, p < .001; dorsals: mean /Cj / = 0.67, mean /Cɣ / = –0.53,
t(243) = 11.08, p < .001). The exception is /sˠ/ vs. /sʲ/, which we return to below.
    An analogous plot for PC3, which we identify with tongue body height, is shown below
(Figure 10). There is a main effect of SECONDARY ARTICULATION on this variable: palatalized
consonants are higher than velarized consonants overall (omean PC3) = 0.88, t(728) =
13.12, p < .001), see Table A2 in the appendix.
    Since Irish contrasts palatalized vs. velarized (rather than plain) consonants (see Section
2.2.1), we should expect that there is active displacement of the tongue body for both kinds
of consonant. The positive vs. negative PC values in Figures 9 and 10 may seem to imply as
16   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 6 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for palatalized (dashed) vs. velarized (solid) consonants at consonantal offset before /uː/
                     (left column) and /iː/ (right column), Speaker 1. Dorsals. Front of the mouth is to the right.


much. However, these are displacements relative to a mean value, and there is no guarantee
that this mean represents a neutral position in any other sense. Given this fact, how do we
gauge whether a sound is velarized, or palatalized, and to what degree it is?
     One way to gauge the relative status of palatalization and velarization is to compare tongue
body variability in each, on the assumption that a tongue body target implies less variability
(see e.g. Perkell & Cohen 1989, Perkell 1990). There are some apparent differences in
variability evident in Figure 9 and Figure 10. To explore these, we used the Brown–Forsythe
test of equality of variance (which makes fewer assumptions about the underlying structure
of the data than Levene’s F-test does and is more robust to non-normal distributions, Brown
& Forsythe 1974). Doing this over the z-score normalized PC values revealed that PC1 is
more variable in velarized coronals than in palatalized coronals (SD: 0.74 vs. 0.57, F = 7.63,
p < . 01). This difference was true of /tˠ/ vs. /tʲ/ (SD: 0.83 vs. 0.60, F = 11.73, p < .001) and
marginally true of /sˠ/ vs. /sʲ/ (SD: 0.58 vs. 0.45, F = 3.90, p = .051). These facts could imply
that velarization is weaker or absent in coronals. On the other hand, /kʲ/ was marginally more
variable than /kˠ/ (SD: 0.96 vs. 0.68, F = 3.82, p = .053). No other significant differences
emerged for PC1 or PC3. We conclude that the relative variance of palatalized and velarized
consonants is consistent with the view that /Cʲ/ and /Cˠ/ are equally specified for dorsal
constriction targets in Irish. In Section 4.5 we return to articulatory differences between
coronals and non-coronals in the production of the /Cʲ/  /Cˠ/ contrast.
     While we quantify tongue body position in our data using PC1 and PC3 values, there is no
absolute criterion for labeling a consonant as categorically ‘palatalized’ or ‘velarized’ on the
                                                                                        Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization    17




         Figure 7 Dimensions of variance for the first four principal components. Solid black lines represent grand mean of the tongue
                  contour across all tracings for all speakers. Dashed grey lines represent changes in shape or position of the tongue contour
                  when each PC varies independently (at ±5 standard deviations around the mean). Front of the mouth is to the right.


basis of its PC1/PC3 values. In the absence of some principled articulatory threshold for this
classification, our measures of dorsal position are necessarily relative rather than absolute.
But it is useful to compare consonants to each other, and as a point of reference we generally
refer to the labial consonants, for two reasons. First, we can be reasonably confident that any
tongue body characteristics of these consonants are in no way artifacts of the primary place
of articulation, since the lips and tongue body are independent. Second, labials overall show
the largest distinction in backness between palatalized and velarized consonants, as can be
seen in Figure 9.
      Since the role of the tongue body in labials has been a subject of question (Section 2.2.1),
it is worth emphasizing that the tongue body is roughly as fronted in /pʲ bʲ/ as it is in any other
palatalized consonant, and that of /pˠ bˠ/ is as far back as – mostly farther back than – that
of any other velarized consonant. Furthermore, the variability of the tongue body position in
these consonants is comparable to that of other consonants, a fact that suggests labials have
a tongue body target just as other consonants do. The standard deviation of the tongue body
position of /pʲ bʲ/ (0.62) is not significantly different from that of /tʲ/ (0.60, p = .15) and is
significantly smaller than that of /kʲ/ (0.96, p < .001), according to the Brown–Forsythe test
for equality of variances. Similarly, the standard deviation for /bˠ pˠ/ (0.62) is lower than that
of /tˠ/ (0.83, p < .001) and not different from that of /kˠ/ (0.68, p = 0.17). The variability
of the tongue body position of the labial fricatives is likewise not significantly different from
that of their counterparts at other places of articulation, except that /fʲ/ (0.81) is more variable
than /sʲ/ (0.45, p < .05).
      Further evidence that labials involve an active specification for dorsal position comes
from a comparison of labials in each vowel context. Compare first the tongue body posture
of a palatalized labial stop before both /iː/ and /uː/, as shown for all speakers in Figure 11. As
this figure shows, the tongue body position of /pʲ bʲ/ before [uː] is very similar to that before
[iː] (if anything it is more fronted).
18     Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




              Figure 8 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for palatalized (dashed) vs. velarized (solid) /pʲ bˠ/ at consonantal offset before /iː/,
                       Speakers 1–5. Front of the mouth is to the right.

    In a similar way, Figure 12 shows that the tongue body position of /pˠ bˠ/ before [iː] is
very similar to that before [uː].4 (On the odd shape of the tongue root for Speaker 1’s [pˠuː] in

4
    Though we transcribe velarization in words like [pˠuːkˠə] for internal consistency, this word is
    impressionistically [puːkə] in auditory terms (see discussion in Section 2.2.1 above and the Conclusion).
    As for the vowel /uː/, it sounds impressionistically back, and its second formant frequency in púca for
    Speaker 1 (a male) ranges approximately from 900 Hz to 1100 Hz.
                                                                                     Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   19




         Figure 9 Tongue body backness (PC1) by consonant for all speakers, at consonantal offset. Higher PC1 = fronter. Overlaid are box
                  plots showing the 25%–75% inter-quartile range. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means. The width of a violin plot
                  at any value corresponds to the estimated likelihood of the measure (here, PC1) occurring at that value.




         Figure 10 Tongue body height (PC3) by consonant for all speakers, at consonantal offset. Higher PC3 = higher. Overlaid are box
                   plots showing the 25%–75% inter-quartile range. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.



Figure 12, see the end of Section 3.6.1.) It seems clear from this comparison that tongue body
position is specified for the labial consonants themselves, rather than being determined solely
by vowel context. We will informally gauge how ‘palatalized’ or ‘velarized’ other sounds are
relative to these benchmarks.


4.4 PC2: Tongue root advancement/retraction
We return to PC2’s dimensions of variation, shown earlier in Figure 7. The final statistical
model for PC2, following the same methodology as that for the models for PC1 and PC3, is
provided in Table A3 of the appendix.
    The largest determinant of PC2 variation by far is the palatalized vs. velarized status of
the consonant. Hence we find a main effect of SECONDARY ARTICULATION ((mean PC2) =
0.94, t(708) = 13.57, p < .001). This is evident in Figure 13, where higher PC2 values
20   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 11 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for palatalized /pʲ bʲ/ before /iː/ (solid) vs. /uː/ (dashed) at consonantal offset.
                      Speakers 1–5.



correspond to deviations that lead to a wider pharyngeal cavity. Since PCA always returns a
set of PCs which account for disjoint (uncorrelated) portions of the variance in the data,
these results suggest that palatalization and velarization involve systematic differences
of pharyngeal width which are at least partially independent of differences in dorsal
position.
    Apart from this effect, there are smaller significant effects reflecting the following
generalizations. First, a significant main effect for MAJOR PLACE(CORONAL) means that
                                                                                 Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   21




        Figure 12 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for velarized /pˠ bˠ/ before /iː/ (solid) vs. /uː/ (dashed) at consonantal offset.
                  Speakers 1–5.


coronals overall are produced with lower PC2 values than labials ((mean PC2) = –0.20,
t(476) = –2.21, p < .05) and with marginally lower PC2 values than dorsals ((mean PC2) =
–0.18, t(466) = –1.90, p = .06). Second, further testing of the significant PLACE × MANNER
interactions reveals an effect of manner on PC2 for dorsal consonants: dorsal stops have lower
PC2 values than dorsal fricatives ((mean PC2) = –0.31, t(243) = –2.09, p < .05). This
effect of manner was not observed for coronals or labials (labials: (mean PC2) = 0.07,
t(234) = 0.50, p = .62; coronals: (mean PC2) = 0.12, t(242) = 0.99, p = .32). Finally, the
three-way PLACE × SECONDARY ARTICULATION × VOWEL CONTEXT interaction indicates that
22   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 13 PC2 values by consonant for all speakers, at consonantal offset. Higher PC2 = more advanced tongue root. Overlaid are
                      box plots showing the 25%–75% inter-quartile range. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.



among palatalized consonants, there is an effect of vowel context (Section 4.6) which differs
by place of articulation, the effect reaching significance only among palatalized coronals,
which have slightly higher PC2 values before /iː/ than before /uː/ ((mean PC2) for /Cj iː/ vs.
/Cj uː/ for labials = –0.34, t(114) = –1.82, p = .07; for coronals = 0.28, t(114) = 2.21, p <
.05; for dorsals = 0.16, t(111) = 0.72, p = .47).



4.5 Effects of place (and manner) on tongue body
We turn now to other effects on tongue body position. Since it would take up too much
space to present the relevant SSANOVA tongue body curves for all five speakers, for the
rest of the paper we present these figures only for Speaker 1. However, as earlier we
substantiate our general conclusions for all of the speakers, and we note where there is
significant variation behind a general finding. Readers interested in SSANOVA curves for all
speakers by place, manner, vowel context, and landmark point can access the data using the
links in the introduction.
    The violin plots in Figure 9 above, showing tongue body backness (PC1), reveal some
differences in the realization of the palatalization contrast depending on place of articulation,
as well as manner. There is a significant interaction between MAJOR PLACE(CORONAL) and
SECONDARY ARTICULATION, due to a smaller backness separation for coronals. This holds
true for the coronal stops, but especially for the coronal fricatives, as can be seen in Figure 9.
This difference is the basis of a significant three-way MAJOR PLACE(CORONAL) × SECONDARY
ARTICULATION × MANNER interaction ((mean PC1) for /sj / vs. /sɣ / = 0.31, t(111) = 3.16,
p < .005; for /tj / vs. /tɣ / = 1.18, t(111) = 8.74, p < .001). The relatively weak PC1 differences
for/sj / and /sɣ / may be related to the realization of /sʲ/ as [ʃ/ɕ]; we return to this issue below.
What Figure 9 also makes clear is that the small separation between palatalized and velarized
coronals in backness is due to the weakness of velarization (in terms of backness), not
palatalization. In fact, using the labials as a touchstone, /tˠ/ seems weakly backed and /sˠ/ not
backed at all.
    On the other hand, the significant three-way MAJOR PLACE(DORSAL) × SECONDARY
ARTICULATION × MANNER interaction is due to the fact that dorsal fricatives show greater
secondary articulation differences than dorsal stops ((mean PC1) for /xj / vs. /xɣ / = 1.64,
t(119) = 12.66, p < .001; for /kj / vs. /kɣ / = 0.74, t(116) = 4.76, p < .001). Only /xˠ/ has a
                                                                                          Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   23




             Figure 14 (Colour online) 1 SSANOVA curves for palatalized (top row) and velarized (bottom row) stops before /uː/ (left) and /iː/
                       (right), at consonantal offset. Speaker 1. Labial = dotted, velar = dashed, coronal = solid.

tongue body posture that is as far back as that of the velarized labials.5 Labials do not show a
corresponding manner-dependent difference in the backness separation between palatalized
and velarized consonants ((mean PC1) for /fj / vs. /fɣ / = 1.87, t(108) = 14.16, p < .001;
for /pj bj / vs. /pɣ bɣ / = 2.01, t(120) = 17.99, p < .001).
     Speaker 1’s SSANOVA plots in Figures 4–6 exemplify all of the generalizations above.
     A significant main effect for MAJOR PLACE(CORONAL) reflects the fact that PC1 values
are overall significantly higher for coronals relative to other places of articulation (vs. labials:
(mean PC1) = 0.69, t(417) = 7.61, p < .001; vs. dorsals: (mean PC1) = 0.45, t(458)
= 5.41, p < .001). Labials and dorsals also differ significantly in their overall PC1 values,
with the labials being somewhat retracted relative to dorsals (dorsals vs. labials: (mean
PC1) = 0.25, t(474) = 2.44, p < .05). This gives a place-based coronal < dorsal < labial
backness scale, abstracting away from secondary articulation and vowel context. Figure 14
shows Speaker 1’s SSANOVA curves by place of articulation for each secondary articulation
and vowel combination, for stops, which largely exemplify these generalizations.
     However, it should be noted that there is considerable variability in these orderings,
depending on speaker, manner, secondary articulation, and vowel. For example, the order
dorsal < labial does not seem to hold for fricatives (this is related to the very back position

5
    The large backness difference between /xˠ/ and /xʲ/ likely also drives a significant PLACE(DORSAL) ×
    MANNER interaction ((mean PC1) for /kj kɣ / vs. /xj xɣ / = 0.40, t(238) = 3.07, p < .005; /tj tɣ / vs. /sj sɣ /
    = 0.03, t(200) = 0.26, p = .79; /pj bj /, /pɣ bɣ / vs. /fj fɣ / = –0.20, t(239) = –1.29, p = .20).
24   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



for /xˠ/ noted above). Nor does it hold for palatalized stops before /uː/ (Figure 14). Among
fricatives, only the velarized ones respect coronal < dorsal.
    Turning to PC3 (height), a significant main effect for MAJOR PLACE(DORSAL) is due to
the fact that dorsals are produced with a higher overall tongue position than labials ((mean
PC3) = 0.39, t(476) = 4.16, p < .001). This difference in height is to be expected given that
dorsal obstruents are formed with a primary lingual constriction while labial obstruents are
not. There is only a marginally significant difference in PC3 for dorsals and coronals ((mean
PC3) = 0.17, t(477) = 1.86, p = .06. However, a comparison between labials and coronals
does reveal a significant difference: coronals are also somewhat higher than labials ((mean
PC3) = 0.22, t(485) = 2.5, p < .05). This yields a place-based dorsal, coronal > labial height
scale. Speaker 1’s tongue contours in Figure 14 largely exemplify these generalizations as
well, especially for coronal > labial. However, as with the backness scale, this scale masks
considerable variability, some of it systematic. The order holds best for palatalized stops.
Among velarized consonants, it is the coronals that seem consistently lower.
    This main effect of MAJOR PLACE on height (PC3) is accompanied by a significant
interaction between MAJOR PLACE and MANNER. Coronals show a relatively large effect of
manner on PC3, coronal stops evincing lower PC3 values than coronal fricatives ((mean
PC3) = –0.53, t(243) = –4.63, p < .001; this generalization does not hold for the velarized
coronals of Speaker 1 or for any coronals of Speaker 5, for whom /tʲ/ is actually higher
than /sʲ/). Labials show the same pattern (fricatives > stops), but with a smaller difference
between group means (mean PC3) = –0.30, t(234) = –2.53, p < .05; this generalization
does not hold consistently of velarized consonants before /uː/, and for Speaker 5 /pʲ/ is actually
higher than /fʲ/). Dorsals show the opposite pattern, dorsal stops having higher overall PC3
values than dorsal fricatives ((mean PC3) = 0.50, t(241) = 3.60, p < .001). However, this
is only consistently true of /xˠ kˠ/ before /uː/ (and even then not for Speaker 2). Figure 15
shows tongue curves of stops vs. fricatives before /iː/ for Speaker 1, which exemplify these
generalizations to some extent.
    Overall, the clearest and most consistent effects involving place and manner are with
respect to PC1: there is weaker tongue body backing and a smaller PC1 separation between
palatalized and velarized consonants for the coronals compared to other places of articulation,
especially in the case of coronal fricatives. In addition, velar fricatives show a larger separation
than velar stops, with /xˠ/ being particularly retracted.


4.6 Effects of vowel context
The violin plots in Figure 16 show PC1 (backness) values as a function of consonant, this
time also broken down by vowel. There is a main effect of VOWEL CONTEXT: PC1 values are
marginally higher at consonant offset when the following vowel is /iː/ (mean PC1 for /Ciː/ =
0.22, for /Cuː/ = 0.057, t(727) = 2.14, p < .05). There is also a two-way MANNER × VOWEL
CONTEXT interaction: the effect of vowel context holds for fricatives overall ((mean PC1)
for /Ciː/ vs. /Cuː/ = 0.37, t(355) = 3.48, p < .001), but not for stops ((mean PC1) = –0.03,
t(366) = –0.30, p = .76). This can be seen in Figure 16. In fact, inspection of individual
speaker curves suggests that this effect of vowel context is most consistent for velarized
fricatives. Note that the effect of vowel context over all consonants is much smaller than the
effect of secondary articulation ((mean PC1) for /Ciː/ vs. /Cuː/ = 0.17, (mean PC1) for
/Cj / vs. /Cɣ / = 1.30).
     There were two significant MAJOR PLACE × SECONDARY ARTICULATION × VOWEL
CONTEXT interactions. We attribute the PLACE(CORONAL) × SECONDARY ARTICULATION ×
VOWEL CONTEXT interaction to the fact that palatalized coronals are slightly more fronted
in the /Ciː/ context than palatalized labials, when compared to their respective counterparts
before /Cuː/ ((mean PC1) for /Cj iː/ vs. /Cj uː/ for labials = 0.03, t(100) = 0.25, p = .80; for
coronals = 0.23, t(108) = 2.19, p < .05). Again this seems to hold only for the fricatives,
as Figure 16 and inspection of individual speaker data both suggest. The corresponding
                                                                                        Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   25




         Figure 15 (Colour online) SSANOVA curves for stop (solid) vs. fricative (dashed) palatalized (left) and velarized (right) consonants
                   before /iː/, at consonantal offset, Speaker 1. Top: labials; middle: coronals; bottom: dorsals.


interaction for PLACE(DORSAL) is likely due to the large difference in backness between /xˠiː/
and /xˠuː/.
    Figure 17 shows the effect of vowel context on height (PC3), analogous to Figure 16 for
backness. There is no main effect of VOWEL CONTEXT on PC3. The lack of such an effect is
not surprising, given that /iː uː/ are both high vowels. However, a MANNER × VOWEL CONTEXT
interaction did reach significance, with fricatives showing a greater effect of vowel context
than stops, similar to the results for PC1. Fricatives had higher overall PC3 values before /iː/
26   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 16 Tongue body backness (PC1) by consonant and vowel context for all speakers, at consonantal offset. Higher PC1 =
                      fronter. Overlaid are box plots showing the 25%–75% inter-quartile range. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.


than before /uː/ ((mean PC3) for /Ciː/ vs. /Cuː/ for fricatives = 0.34, t(356) = 3.14, p < .001;
for stops = –0.06, t(366) = –0.58, p = .56). There is also a significant interaction between
SECONDARY ARTICULATION and VOWEL CONTEXT: PC3 variation conditioned by vowel context
is greater for velarized /Cɣ / than for palatalized /Cj / ((mean PC3) for /Cɣ iː/ vs. /Cɣ uː/ =
0.34, t(364) = 3.70, p < .001; for /Cj iː/ vs. /Cj uː/ = –0.06, t(361) = –0.62, p = .58). However,
the violin plots in Figure 17 suggest that both of these generalizations hold mainly or only for
velarized fricatives. This is reflected in a significant three-way SECONDARY ARTICULATION ×
MANNER × VOWEL CONTEXT interaction (Table A2 of the appendix).
     Finally, a MAJOR PLACE × MANNER × VOWEL CONTEXT interaction seems largely
attributable to the fact that PC3 variation by vowel context was larger for dorsal fricatives
than for fricatives at other places of articulation ((mean PC3) for /xj iː xɣ iː/ vs. /xj uː xɣ uː/
= 0.61, t(111) = 3.46, p < .001; for /sj iː sɣ iː/ vs. /sj uː sɣ uː/ = 0.24, t(120) = 1.56, p = .12;
for /fj iː fɣ iː/ vs. /fj uː fɣ uː/ = 0.17, t(117) = 0.96, p = .34) or for stops. This difference holds
over all of the speakers.
     Overall, these results indicate an effect of vowel context on the PC1 and PC3 values of
consonants. However, this effect is small in comparison to the effect of secondary articulation
on tongue body position, and it seems mainly true of velarized fricatives.


4.7 Consonant dynamics
A full exploration of the dynamics of palatalization and velarization is beyond the scope of
this paper. However, we note some broad tendencies here based on visual inspection of PC
values and SSANOVA curves at different temporal landmarks for each consonant, along with
an exploratory statistical analysis.
                                                                                     Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   27




         Figure 17 Tongue body height (PC3) by consonant and vowel context for all speakers, at consonantal offset. Higher PC3 = higher.
                   Overlaid are box plots showing the 25%–75% inter-quartile range. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.


      The violin plots in Figure 18 show PC1 (tongue body backness) by consonant and
consonant landmark – onset, midpoint, and offset – in the context of the vowel /uː/. Each
frame shows the PC1 values for a given consonant over the three landmarks. For example,
the top-left panel shows consonant backness values for /fˠuː/ at onset, midpoint, and offset.
As can be seen, the tongue body of palatalized stops and /fʲ/ fronts from onset to offset, as
does the distance between the means of palatalized and velarized pairs like /fˠ/ and /fʲ/ for /fʲ
fˠ/ and the stops. This increasing frontness of /Cʲ/ must be due to the palatalization gesture,
since the following vowel /uː/ is back. In contrast, there is very little movement throughout
the velarized consonants in this /uː/ context.
      Figure 19 gives analogous data in the context of /iː/. The tongue body of palatalized
consonants again fronts at least through the midpoint, though in this case it is impossible
to know how much of that fronting can be attributed to the following vowel. Again we see
little change in the backness of velarized consonants, though the tongue body seems to front
slightly (rather than back) over time for /sˠ/ and /xˠ/, suggesting coarticulation, as seen in
the previous section. This stability of the velarization gesture across landmarks even in the
/iː/ context suggests that this is an inherent property of velarization. Why velarization should
differ in this way from palatalization is unclear.
      The broad trends above were supported by the results of a linear mixed-effects model which
included CONSONANT LANDMARK as a predictor of dorsal position (Table A4 of the appendix).
The full model is presented in the appendix; for reasons of space we focus here on findings
related to the time course of articulation. This model found a main effect of CONSONANT
LANDMARK. In general PC1 values were higher (more fronted) at consonant midpoint
than at onset (p < .01), though the difference seen between midpoint and offset was not
significantly different (p = .25). A significant interaction between SECONDARY ARTICULATION
28   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 18 Tongue body backness (PC1) of consonant, by consonant and temporal location (consonant onset, midpoint, offset),
                      before the vowel /uː/. Higher PC1 = fronter. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.


and CONSONANT LANDMARK (p < .001) indicates that this effect was stronger for palatalized
consonants: they show more fronting between onset and midpoint than velarized consonants,
as expected. We also observed a significant interaction between VOWEL CONTEXT and
CONSONANT LANDMARK (p < .005) which we attribute to greater fronting between consonant
midpoint and offset in the context of [i:], presumably due to coarticulation. Lastly, we found
a significant three-way SECONDARY ARTICULATION × MANNER × CONSONANT LANDMARK
interaction (p < .05): this interaction may be driven by the difference discussed above between
/s/ and /x/ on the one hand and /f/ and the stops on the other.
     The finding that palatalization peaks towards the offset is consistent with other reports in
the literature (see Section 3.5), though our results indicate that the greatest movement is from
onset to midpoint. The failure to find a significant difference reflecting the visible further
fronting of /fʲ/ and the palatalized stops might be due to the behavior of /sʲ/ and /xʲ/, where
palatalization clearly does peak by midpoint, as seen in Figure 18. It should be borne in mind
that /sʲ/ in Irish is realized as [ɕ], not /sʲ/ with a secondary articulation, so we may not expect
increasinɡ frontness during this segment anyway. The same may be true of /xʲ/, which is
impressionistically much like [ç].
     Figure 20 and Figure 21 show analogous information for PC3 (tongue body height).
Patterns in this case are less obvious. Overall, tongue dorsum raising is more prevalent among
palatalized than velarized consonants, particularly palatalized fricatives, though /x/ is an
exception. There also seems to be more raising in the context of /i:/, again particularly for
fricatives.
     These trends were also broadly supported by the results of a linear mixed-effects model
which took PC3 as the dependent measure (Table A5 of the appendix). Unlike our model
for PC1 dynamics, there was no main effect of CONSONANT LANDMARK (onset vs. midpoint,
p < 1; midpoint vs. offset, p < .79). However, there was a significant interaction between
CONSONANT LANDMARK and SECONDARY ARTICULATION: palatalized consonants are more
raised at midpoint than at onset (p < .005). There was also a marginally significant difference
in raising between midpoint and offset for palatalized consonants (p < .07). This weak effect
                                                                                  Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   29




         Figure 19 Tongue body backness (PC1) of consonant, by consonant and temporal location (consonant onset, midpoint, offset),
                   before the vowel /iː/. Higher PC1 = fronter. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.


may be stronger for fricatives, as indicated by a marginally significant three-way interaction
between SECONDARY ARTICULATION, MANNER, and CONSONANT LANDMARK for midpoint-
offset comparisons (p < .09). This is consistent with our finding of a significant MANNER
× CONSONANT LANDMARK interaction, which suggests that fricatives in general have greater
dorsum raising at consonantal offset than at midpoint (p < .001). Finally, a significant VOWEL
CONTEXT × CONSONANT LANDMARK interaction indicates greater dorsal raising at offset than
midpoint for consonants preceding /iː/ (p < .05).
     A limit on the conclusions in this section is that landmarks like ‘onset’ are approximate
and somewhat variable, given the limitations of frame rate (one image roughly every 17 ms)
and the inherently imprecise nature of articulatory to acoustic alignment (see Section 3.4).
We aligned audio to ultrasound video stills by defining ‘offset’ in terms of alignment of the
audible burst of a reference /kˠ/ to the first ultrasound frame showing evidence of movement
of the constriction away from the palate. It is possible, for example, that this ultrasound frame
is closer on average to the midpoint of occlusion, say, than to the end.


5 Discussion
Our goal was to test the following hypotheses (repeated from (4) above):
(5) Hypotheses
    a. Tongue Body Hypothesis: Tongue body position consistently and sufficiently
       distinguishes palatalized from non-palatalized consonants at all places of articulation.
       Palatalized consonants are fronted and possibly raised compared to velarized
       consonants.
    b. Coronal Hypothesis: Velarization is weaker in coronals than in labials and dorsals.
    c. Coarticulation Resistance Hypothesis: Tongue body position does not vary greatly
       with vowel context, unlike in languages with no palatalization contrast.
30   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




            Figure 20 Tongue body height (PC3) of consonant, by consonant and temporal location (consonant onset, midpoint, offset), before
                      the vowel /uː/. Higher PC3 = higher. Diamonds indicate medians and lines means.




            Figure 21 Tongue body height (PC3) of consonant, by consonant and temporal location (consonant onset, midpoint, offset), before
                      the vowel /iː/. Higher PC3 = higher. Overlaid are box plots showing the 25%–75% inter-quartile range. Diamonds
                      indicate medians and lines means.
                                                                 Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   31




Our ultrasound results show, first, that tongue body position indeed very reliably distinguishes
palatalized from non-palatalized consonants, at least for the range of consonants and contexts
explored here. For every pair of consonants differing only in secondary articulation (e.g.
/tˠ/ vs. /tʲ/), for every speaker, the SSANOVA curves are wholly or largely distinct in the
dorsal region. Overall, the tongue body is fronter and higher for palatalized than for velarized
consonants, just as it is in Russian and Scottish Gaelic (Section 2.2.2). The tongue body
backness differences are smaller overall for the coronals (especially /sj sˠ/).
      As noted in Section 2.2.2, palatalization has been associated by Fant (1960) with a wider
pharyngeal cavity (or absence of a pharyngeal constriction). We offered reasons in that section
to doubt that pharyngeal cavity width is the primary articulatory correlate of a palatalization
contrast. For example, an increased pharyngeal width in palatalized consonants might simply
be a side-effect of tongue body fronting. Our data do seem to support this last claim (see,
for example, PC1 in Figure 7 and the SSANOVA curves in Figures 4–6). Tongue body
backness might be considered ‘primary’ to the Irish palatalization contrast, at least judging
by the relative contribution of PC1 compared to PC2 and PC3 in accounting for variance.
However, PC2 accounts for fully 30% of the variance in our data. This is an interesting result,
indicating a substantial and INDEPENDENT role for tongue root advancement and retraction in
the contrast. In other words, our results suggest that the Irish palatalization contrast involves
both tongue body and tongue root targets. In this respect our Tongue Body Hypothesis is
only partially supported: dorsal position does not appear to be the only lingual correlate of
secondary palatalization and velarization. The relationship between this articulatory aspect
of Irish palatalization and the acoustic-perceptual properties of those consonants is a topic
worth further exploring.
      Turning to effects of place (and it turns out, manner), the height difference between /kˠ/
and /kʲ/ is minimal in comparison to the backness difference between these sounds. This is
not surprising, since velar and palatal closures by their nature require a high tongue body.
However, the situation with /xˠ/ vs. /xʲ/ is different. The sound /xˠ/ is both a good deal further
back and lower than /xʲ/, and indeed than its stop counterpart /kˠ/. It has been claimed that
some Connemara speakers optionally pronounce /xˠ/ as uvular [X] (Ó Curnáin 2007: 171).
Our tongue body results for /xˠ/ might support such a uvular realization. (See Geng 2007
and references therein for a similar finding for the German dorsal fricative.) In that case,
‘velarization’ would be more precisely uvularization. Since the tongue body is roughly just as
backed and low for velarized labials as for /xˠ/, this might likewise imply that ‘velarization’ is
uvularization more generally in Irish. This is indeed consistent with velarization having both
tongue body and tongue root components.
      Turning to the coronals, for /sˠ/ vs. /sʲ/ it is the backness difference that is minimal overall
(but this is not true for all speakers); there is a consistent difference in height. In terms of
backness, and using /pˠ bˠ/ as a point of reference, /sˠ/ shows little or no velarization. The
sound /tˠ/ is also weakly velarized, though not so weakly as is /sˠ/. In spite of this fact, the
sounds /tˠ/ and /tʲ/ are well separated in backness, in part because /tʲ/ is very fronted. Overall,
the Coronal Hypothesis, that velarization is weaker in coronals, is supported, though only
with respect to tongue body backness; we find no such difference for the tongue root.
      It is worth pointing out that the weaker velarization of the coronals is audible (and has
been observed in traditional descriptions of Connacht Irish, e.g. Mhac an Fhailigh 1980). For
our speakers the /tˠ/ and /sˠ/ of tuı́ /tˠiː/ ‘straw’ and suı́ /sˠiː/ ‘sit’ ranged impressionistically
from very velarized to not velarized at all. This difference for coronals mirrors what has been
found for Russian and possibly Scottish Gaelic (Section 2.2.2), suggesting that there might be a
general explanation for this pattern. Such an explanation could lie in production. For example,
it is conceivable that constraints on producing coronals like /t/ or /s/, together with the coupling
between the tongue body and blade/tip, inhibit tongue body backing in coronals. However,
there is evidence that at least in some languages dental sounds are regularly accompanied by
tongue body backing (Stevens, Keyser & Kawasaki 1986, Dart 1991, Operstein 2010, Lee-
Kim 2014). At least /tˠ/ in Connemara Irish is dental (de Bhaldraithe 1945, Ó Raghallaigh
32   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



2013), so this evidence may speak against such an explanation rooted in production. An
alternative, but complementary, explanation relies on the idea of cue trade-off: /tʲ/ and /sʲ/
have robust cues to their palatalization apart from the second formant displacement associated
with tongue body production. The sound /tʲ/ is frequently affricated; the intensity, duration,
and quality of the noise in /sʲ/ and in the release of /tʲ/ are potential cues to palatalization (Nı́
Chiosáin & Padgett 2012). Indeed, what we transcribe for consistency as /sʲ/ is realized as [ɕ]
or [ʃ] in Irish, so that the contrast between this sound and /sˠ/ might be wholly borne by cues
contained in the frication noise. It is possible that these ‘secondary’ cues to palatalization in
/tʲ sʲ/ compensate for weaker velarization in /tˠ sˠ/.
     Our findings regarding velarization of non-palatalized consonants in Irish closely parallel
previous findings for Russian (and possibly Scottish Gaelic), as detailed in Section 2.2.2.
In particular, tongue body backing is strong in velarized labials, but significantly weaker or
absent in velarized coronals. We also found that tongue body backness is more variable in
velarized than in palatalized coronals. In terms of both degree and consistency, velarization
in coronals may be ‘weaker’ than palatalization in both Irish and Russian.
     Our results show that, at least in the context of /iː uː/, labial stops and fricatives exhibit
robust palatalization and velarization. We can think of two possible explanations why some
traditional descriptions imply less tongue body activity for labials, contrary to our findings
(Section 2.2.1). First, compared to coronal and even velar obstruents, palatalized labial
obstruents have less in the way of ‘secondary’ cues to palatalization, consisting of the
intensity, duration, and spectral properties of noise. This is because the noise produced
by labial obstruents tends to be lower in intensity, shorter in duration (in the case of stops),
and less shaped by resonant cavities (Stevens 1998: 340–375). This means that next to front
vowels in particular (where the second formant is already high due to the neighboring vowel),
audible palatalization is minimal. Second, the tongue body position of labials may be less
subject to introspection than that of coronals or velars, since no consistent contact is made
between the tongue blade or body and the roof of the mouth.
     Our tongue body data allow us to see past significant impressionistic variability in the
realization of Irish palatalization. For example, the Irish contrast has been described as one of
palatalized vs. plain consonants before back vowels, e.g. beo [bʲoː] ‘alive’ vs. bó [boː] (rather
than [bˠoː]) ‘cow’, but of PLAIN vs. VELARIZED consonants, respectively, before front vowels,
e.g. bı́ [biː] (rather than [bʲiː]) ‘be (IMP)’ vs. [bˠiː] ‘yellow’ (Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2001,
2012). That is, at least for labials palatalization is no more evident before front vowels than
velarization is before back vowels like /uː/. (As noted above, palatalization is more auditorily
salient in coronals and velars, even before front vowels, because it is often accompanied by
significant noise.) This apparent shift in the realization of the contrast can be seen as only an
artifact of the vocalic context, however. As seen earlier (Figure 11 and Figure 12), the tongue
body is in roughly the same position in pı́osa /pʲiːsˠə/ ‘piece’, impressionistically [piːsə], as
it is in b’fhiú [bʲuː] ‘it is worth’, just as it is in the same position in púca [puːkə] ‘ghost’ as
it is in buı́ [bˠiː] ‘yellow’. While the transition from /Cˠ/ to [iː/eː] or from /Cʲ/ to [uː/oː] is
highly audible, there is relatively little or no transition in tongue body position from /Cˠ/ to
[uː/oː] or from /Cʲ/ to [iː/eː]. In other words, the secondary articulations of the consonants
do not actually depend (much) on vowel context, but the changing vowel context causes the
perception of the sounds to differ.
     Vowel context – /iː/ vs. /uː/ – had a significant effect on the backness of the tongue
body during consonant production. However, this was true only of fricatives overall, and
mainly for velarized fricatives. The greater effect on velarized consonants may reflect greater
variability in the production of velarization in general (see Kedrova et al. 2008). However, we
are puzzled about the finding for fricatives. It is possible that this finding is an artifact of our
sound labeling. The end of a fricative was taken to be at the onset of higher formant visibility
in the following vowel, while in the case of stops it was the stop burst. If our labeling criterion
for fricative offsets placed the end of the consonant further into the articulation of the vowel,
then vowels would likely appear to have a greater effect on the tongue body of fricatives.
                                                                    Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   33




     Overall, however, the effect of vowel on the tongue body position of these Irish consonants
is very small, roughly 13% of the effect of secondary articulation itself even at the offset of
the consonant (Table A1 of the appendix), supporting our third, Coarticulation Resistance
Hypothesis. Presumably the inherent secondary palatalization and velarization specifications
of Irish consonants largely override coarticulation with following vowels. Farnetani et al.
(1991) and Nı́ Chasaide & Fealy (1991) find resistance to coarticulation for Irish consonants,
and the effect is well documented for Russian (Öhman 1966, Purcell 1979, Choi & Keating
1991, see discussion in Recasens, Pallarès & Fontdevila 1997, Manuel 1999, Recasens 1999).
     Since our speakers were radio broadcasters (see discussion in Section 3.1), it could well
be that their pronunciations were more conservative and/or hyperarticulated than those of the
average Irish speaker. In addition, they may have inferred from the presentation of the materials
that we were interested in the palatalization contrast. We doubt that these facts undermine any
of the basic conclusions of this paper. For example, the evidence of coarticulation resistance
discussed above is mirrored by previous studies of both Irish and Russian (Section 2.2.2); the
evidence that coronal velarization is different from that of labials and dorsals is also consistent
with previous studies of Russian and descriptions of Irish. If our speakers are different at all,
it is probably in the degree to which they maintain the palatalization contrast in general: as
noted in Section 2.1, there is evidence that the contrast is less well maintained by younger
speakers.
     This paper is of interest also for its use of principal component analysis (PCA) to
characterize effects on the tongue body and root. This analysis led to relatively simple,
interpretable, results, and did so while taking the entire tongue shape into account rather
than relying on a single point or other less secure and representative measure. An early
precursor in this regard is Harshman et al. (1977), which used a related method, PARAFAC,
to explore factors underlying the production of English vowels. Harshman et al.’s analysis
yielded two main factors (dimensions of variation): one was ‘a forward movement of the
root of the tongue accompanied by an upward movement of the front of the tongue’, and the
other ‘an upward and backward movement of the tongue’. Unlike Harshman et al., we found
a principal component related to the tongue root independent of one related to tongue height
(or backness). This most likely reflects a real difference between the phenomena examined:
Harshman et al. examined English vowels, and there is independent evidence that tongue body
height and tongue root advancement co-vary for the English tense/lax contrast (Ladefoged
& Maddieson 1996: 302–305, Tiede 1996). If these factors co-vary in the data, we expect
them to show up as a single factor in analyses involving PCA or PARAFAC, which reduce
correlated variation to a single factor.6



6 Conclusion
Our results, together with the related archive of images, data, and recordings (see introduction)
should be of interest to anyone concerned with understanding the Irish palatalization contrast,
including phonologists, phoneticians, dialectologists, and Irish language learners. Apart from
its descriptive interest, the data here bear on theories of coarticulation and contrast realization,
among other areas.
     One limitation of this study is its focus on data from only one of the three major dialects,
Connacht Irish. We have obtained analogous data representing the two other major dialect
areas, Munster and Ulster Irish, which we intend to present in future work. Apart from its

6
    It is also relevant that in a PARAFAC analysis, one must specify up front the desired number of output
    factors. Because Harshman et al. (1977) specified only two factors, they may have simply excluded a
    priori finding a factor separating tongue root advancement from tongue body height. Harshman et al.
    argue (p. 705) against this possibility, but acknowledge the need for further research on this point.
34   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



descriptive importance, data from three dialects can be likened to a controlled experiment in
which hypotheses about a palatalization contrast can be better tested. For example, palatalized
coronal stops in Ulster Irish are realized with more affrication than in other dialects, while
velarized labials in that dialect are described as strongly rounded (Quiggin 1906, Boyle 1973).
Does affrication of /tʲ/ and /dʲ/ to [tʃ] and [dʒ] respectively imply even weaker velarization
of their velarized counterparts than seen for Connemara Irish, as the discussion of cue
compensation in Section 5 would imply? If velarized labials are rounded, does this rounding
trade off with tongue backing? (We also intend to analyze lip capture data from these same
ultrasound sessions.)
    This study is also limited in the range of consonants and contexts examined. In future work
we plan to explore other consonant types (particularly sonorants) and to examine consonants
in a wider range of contexts, including in word-final position and adjacent to a broader range
of vowels. A wider range of vowel contexts will allow us to better test some claims about
Irish secondary articulations (involving for example the role of tongue body height), while a
comparison of word-initial and word-final contrasts will allow us, for example, to test claims
about the phonetic origins of word- or syllable-final neutalization of secondary articulation
contrasts (see Kochetov 2002, 2004; Nı́ Chiosáin & Padgett 2012).


Acknowledgements
     This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants No.
     BCS-1424398 and BCS-1423772, and by grants from the UC Santa Cruz Committee on Research.
     Many people contributed to the improvement of this paper; we thank them here, and apologize for not
     listing them all by name. We are grateful to Jenny Bellik for her many contributions to our project,
     and to the undergraduate research assistants who make it possible. We also thank the anonymous
     reviewers and JIPA editor Amalia Arvaniti for their comments, which greatly improved this
     paper.


Appendix. Statistical models
Model for PC1 (Sections 3.6.4 and 4.3)
P-values were estimated from the t statistic using an upper-bound 715 degrees of freedom
(733 observations less the 18 fixed-effect parameters in the final model, see Baayen 2008:
297). The model has a fairly low amount of collinearity (κ = 1.95, VIF < 8.18 for all
predictors). These values were computed using MER-UTILS (Frank 2014); on collinearity
see Baayen (2008: 221–222), York (2012), and Wurm & Fisicaro (2014). Significant
predictors are marked with an asterisk. Values for B in Table A1 are in z-scores, as all
models were fit to z-score normalized values of the principal component (see discussion in
Section 3.6.3).
Model for PC3 (Sections 3.6.4 and 4.3)
P-values were estimated from the t statistic using an upper-bound 718 degrees of freedom
(733 observations less the 15 fixed-effect parameters in the final model). The model has a
fairly low amount of collinearity (κ = 1.80, VIF < 5.39 for all predictors).
Model for PC2 (Sections 3.6.4 and 4.4)
P-values were estimated from the t statistic using an upper-bound 719 degrees of freedom
(733 observations less the 14 fixed-effects parameters in the final model). The model has a
fairly low amount of collinearity (κ = 1.94, VIF < 5.51 for all predictors).
Model for PC1 dynamics (Section 4.7)
In order to investigate consonant dynamics, we computed another linear mixed-effects model
with PC1 (backness) as the dependent measure. The initial model included fixed effects for
                                                                                        Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization      35




        Table A1 Final regression model for PC1 (backness). Factors are sum-coded; coefficients express predicted change in value of
                 PC1 relative to grand mean for all levels of that factor.
        Fixed effects                                        Estimated B              SE(B)                t-value              p(>|t|)
        (Intercept)                                           0.130393                0.047128              2.767               < .01
        MAJOR PLACE: coronal                                  0.378694                0.080911              4.680               < .001∗
        MAJOR PLACE: dorsal                                  0.093480                0.097630             0.958                 .34
        SECONDARY ARTICULATION: palatalized                   0.649728                0.096845              6.709               < .001∗
        MANNER: fricative                                    0.048130                0.038729             1.243                 .21
        VOWEL CONTEXT: /Ciː/                                  0.087396                0.040220              2.173               < .05∗
        PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                             0.282280                0.058496                4.826             < .001∗
        coronal × palatalized
        PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                             0.047530                0.087811             0.541                      .59
        dorsal × palatalized
        PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                0.027715              0.029585                0.937                    .35
        coronal × fricative
        PLACE × MANNER:
                                                             0.154760                0.029586             5.231               < .001∗
        dorsal × fricative
        SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                             0.005950                0.045960             0.129                      .90
        palatalized × fricative
        PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                                0.005740              0.042647                0.135                    .90
        coronal × /Ciː/
        PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                                0.005607              0.058251                0.096                    .92
        dorsal × /Ciː/
        SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                             0.046300                0.031583             1.466                      .14
        palatalized × /Ciː/
        MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                0.101194              0.030996                3.265             < .005∗
        fricative × /Ciː/
        PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                             0.206620                0.029584             6.984               < .001∗
        coronal × palatalized × fricative
        PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                                0.235812              0.029585                7.971             < .001∗
        dorsal × palatalized × fricative
        PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                                0.074229              0.029583                2.509             < .05∗
        coronal × palatalized /Ciː/
        PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                             0.076820                0.029586             2.596               < .01∗
        dorsal × palatalized × /Ciː/
        ∗
            = Statistically significant at α = .05



MANNER, MAJOR PLACE, SECONDARY ARTICULATION, and VOWEL CONTEXT, as well as all two-
and three-way interactions between these terms. It additionally included a fixed effect of
CONSONANT LANDMARK (onset, midpoint, offset); two-way interactions between CONSONANT
LANDMARK and each of SECONDARY ARTICULATION, VOWEL CONTEXT, and MANNER; a three-
way interaction between CONSONANT LANDMARK, SECONDARY ARTICULATION, and VOWEL
CONTEXT; and another three-way interaction between CONSONANT LANDMARK, SECONDARY
ARTICULATION, and MANNER. A random intercept for speaker was included, as well as random
intercepts and by-speaker random slopes for SECONDARY ARTICULATION and CONSONANT
LANDMARK. This is a relatively simple random effects structure, but we found that models
with more complex random effects structures either failed to converge or involved large
amounts of collinearity.
    P-values were estimated from the t statistic using an upper-bound 2168 degrees of freedom
(2199 observations less the 31 fixed-effects parameters in the final model). The model has a
low amount of collinearity (κ = 2.03, VIF < 1.4 for all predictors).
36   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



            Table A2 Final regression model for PC3 (backness). Factors are sum-coded; coefficients express predicted change in value of
                     PC3 relative to grand mean for all levels of that factor.
            Fixed effects                                        Estimated B              SE(B)                t-value              p(>|t|)
            (Intercept)                                             0.017480              0.049784                0.351               .73
            MAJOR PLACE: coronal                                    0.061893              0.071508                0.866               .39
            MAJOR PLACE: dorsal                                     0.177881              0.073907                2.407             < .05∗
            SECONDARY ARTICULATION: palatalized                     0.617489              0.067134                9.198             < .001∗
            MANNER: fricative                                       0.024646              0.068211                0.361               .72
            VOWEL CONTEXT: /Ciː/                                    0.030835              0.062206                0.496               .64
            PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                    0.209701              0.035174                5.962             < .001∗
            coronal × fricative
            PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                 0.302950                0.035175             8.613               < .001∗
            dorsal × fricative
            SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                                    0.006806              0.039828                0.171                    .86
            palatalized × fricative
            PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                                 0.074590                0.046421             1.607                      .11
            coronal × /Ciː/
            PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                                    0.126022              0.081510                1.546                    .12
            dorsal × /Ciː/
            SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                                 0.091110                0.032211             2.829               < .005∗
            palatalized × /Ciː/
            MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                    0.074879              0.025697                2.914             < .005∗
            fricative × /Ciː/
            PLACE × MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                 0.008420                0.035176             0.239                      .81
            coronal × fricative × /Ciː/
            PLACE × MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                    0.076053              0.035176                2.162             < .05∗
            dorsal × fricative × /Ciː/
            SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                 0.086130                0.024920             3.456               < .001∗
            palatalized × fricative × /Ciː/
           ∗
               = Statistically significant at α = .05

            Table A3 Final regression model for PC2. Factors are sum-coded; coefficients express predicted change in value of PC2
                     relative to grand mean for all levels of that factor.
            Fixed effects                                        Estimated B              SE(B)                t-value              p(>|t|)
            (Intercept)                                           0.268543                0.058933              4.557               < .001
            MAJOR PLACE: coronal                                 0.295966                0.084826             3.489               < .001∗
            MAJOR PLACE: dorsal                                   0.137513                0.130467              1.054                 .29
            SECONDARY ARTICULATION: palatalized                   0.539756                0.062375              8.653               < .001∗
            MANNER: fricative                                     0.065553                0.049889              1.314                 .19
            VOWEL CONTEXT: /Ciː/                                  0.070051                0.042122              1.663                 .10
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                                 0.069804                0.137955             0.506                      .61
            coronal palatalized
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                                    0.124920              0.094344                1.324                    .19
            dorsal × palatalized
            PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                 0.086155                0.038789             2.221               < .05∗
            coronal × fricative
            PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                    0.135454              0.038791                3.492             < .001∗
            dorsal × fricative
            PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                                 0.004018                0.050409             0.080                      .94
            coronal × /Ciː/
                                                                                  Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization        37




Table A3 Continued
Fixed effects                                          Estimated B              SE(B)                  t-value               p(>|t|)
PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                          0.097354              0.081649                  1.192                    .23
dorsal × /Ciː/
SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                       0.041802                0.040990               1.020                      .31
palatalized × /Ciː/
PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                          0.092764              0.038787                  2.392              < .05∗
coronal × palatalized × /Ciː/
PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                          0.026871              0.038789                  0.693                    .49
dorsal × palatalized × /Ciː/
∗
    = Statistically significant at α = .05



Table A4 Final regression model for PC1. All factors are sum-coded except for CONSONANT LANDMARK; coefficients express
         predicted change in value of PC1 relative to grand mean for all levels of that factor. CONSONANT LANDMARK is backward
         difference coded; coefficients express predicted change in value of PC1 relative to the previous level for that factor
         (onset > midpoint > offset).
Fixed effects                                         Estimated B               SE(B)                 t-value               p(>|t|)
(Intercept)                                            0.006357                 0.014015                0.454                 .65
MAJOR PLACE: coronal                                   0.397260                 0.019768               20.096               < .001∗
MAJOR PLACE: dorsal                                   0.065296                 0.019768              3.303                < .001∗
SECONDARY ARTICULATION: palatalized                    0.566544                 0.075901                7.464               < .001∗
MANNER: fricative                                     0.055782                 0.014005              3.983                < .001∗
VOWEL CONTEXT: /Ciː/                                   0.021372                 0.014005                1.526                 .13
C LANDMARK: onset vs. midpoint                         0.268477                 0.097690                2.748               < .01∗
C LANDMARK: midpoint vs. offset                        0.050477                 0.043745                1.154                 .25
PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                      0.187972                 0.019768              9.509                < .001∗
coronal × palatalized
PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                      0.011281                 0.019769              0.571                      .57
dorsal × palatalized
PLACE × MANNER:
                                                         0.042880               0.019770                 2.169              < .05∗
coronal × fricative
PLACE × MANNER:
                                                      0.130478                 0.019769              6.600                < .001∗
dorsal × fricative
PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                         0.028715               0.019769                 1.453                    .15
coronal × /Ciː/
PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                      0.051633                 0.019770              2.612                < .01∗
dorsal × /Ciː/
SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                         0.038061               0.014004                 2.718              < .01∗
palatalized × fricative
SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                      0.031928                 0.014004              2.280                < .05∗
palatalized × /Ciː/
MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                         0.053371               0.014003                 3.811              < .001∗
fricative × /Ciː/
SECOND. ARTIC. × C LANDMARK:
                                                         0.171345               0.034292                 4.997              < .001∗
palatalized × onset vs. midpoint
SECOND. ARTIC. × C LANDMARK:
                                                         0.049794               0.034292                 1.452                    .15
palatalized × midpoint vs. offset
MANNER × C LANDMARK:
                                                         0.045019               0.034292                 1.313                    .19
fricative × onset vs. midpoint
38   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



            Table A4 Continued
            Fixed effects                                         Estimated B              SE(B)                 t-value                p(>|t|)
            MANNER × C LANDMARK:
                                                                     0.000451              0.034292                   0.013                   .99
            fricative × midpoint vs. offset
            V CONTEXT × C LANDMARK:
                                                                  0.00149                 0.034291                0.043                     .97
            /Ciː/ × onset vs. midpoint
            V CONTEXT × C LANDMARK:
                                                                     0.095957              0.034291                   2.798             < .005∗
            /Ciː/ × midpoint vs. offset
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                                  0.199069                0.019769              10.070                < .001∗
            coronal × palatalized × fricative
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                                     0.271212              0.019769                 13.719              < .001∗
            dorsal × palatalized × fricative
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                                     0.071577              0.019769                   3.621             < .001∗
            coronal × palatalized × /Ciː/
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                                  0.057522                0.019769                2.910               < .005∗
            dorsal × palatalized × /Ciː/
            PLACE × MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                  0.025035                0.019768                1.266                     .21
            dorsal × fricative × /Ciː/
            PLACE × MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                                     0.043112              0.019768                   2.181             < .05∗
            coronal × fricative × /Ciː/
            SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER × C LANDMARK:
            palatalized × fricative × onset vs.                      0.004239              0.034294                   0.124                   .90
            midpoint
            SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER × C LANDMARK:
            palatalized × fricative × midpoint vs.                0.076293                0.034293                2.225               < .05∗
            offset
           ∗
               = Statistically significant at α = .05



            Table A5 Final regression model for PC3. All factors are sum-coded except for CONSONANT LANDMARK; coefficients express
                     predicted change in value of PC3 relative to grand mean for all levels of that factor. CONSONANT LANDMARK is backward
                     difference coded; coefficients express predicted change in value of PC3 relative to the previous level for that factor
                     (onset > midpoint > offset).
            Fixed effects                                         Estimated B              SE(B)                 t-value                p(>|t|)
            (Intercept)                                            0.001521                0.015436                  0.099                .921
            MAJOR PLACE: coronal                                  0.035219                0.021747                1.620                 .105
            MAJOR PLACE: dorsal                                    0.382980                0.021747                 17.611              < .001∗
            SECONDARY ARTICULATION: palatalized                    0.415424                0.102124                  4.068              < .001∗
            MANNER: fricative                                     0.040212                0.015406                2.610               < .01∗
            VOWEL CONTEXT: /Ciː/                                   0.010446                0.015406                  0.678                .498
            C LANDMARK: onset vs. midpoint                        0.000365                0.101657                0.004                 .997
            C LANDMARK: midpoint vs. offset                       0.019941                0.074713                0.267                 .789
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                                     0.264164              0.021747                 12.147              < .001∗
            coronal × palatalized
            PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC.:
                                                                  0.149581                0.021747                6.878               < .001∗
            dorsal × palatalized
            PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                     0.175526              0.021749                   8.071             < .001∗
            coronal × fricative
            PLACE × MANNER:
                                                                  0.301705                0.021747              13.873                < .001∗
            dorsal × fricative
                                                                      Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization    39




         Table A5 Continued
         Fixed effects                                Estimated B   SE(B)                t-value              p(>|t|)
         PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                      0.022591     0.021747             1.039                   .299
         coronal × /Ciː/
         PLACE × V CONTEXT:
                                                        0.026731    0.021749                1.229                 .219
         dorsal × /Ciː/
         SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                        0.095054    0.015406                6.170             < .001∗
         palatalized × fricative
         SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                      0.051316     0.015406             3.331               < .005∗
         palatalized × /Ciː/
         MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                        0.050972    0.015405                3.309             < .005∗
         fricative × /Ciː/
         SECOND. ARTIC. × C LANDMARK:
                                                        0.114749    0.037724                3.042             < .005∗
         palatalized × onset vs. midpoint
         SECOND. ARTIC. × C LANDMARK:
                                                      0.068802     0.037724             1.824                   .068
         palatalized × midpoint vs. offset
         MANNER × C LANDMARK:
                                                      0.002531     0.037724             0.067                   .947
         fricative × onset vs. midpoint
         MANNER × C LANDMARK:
                                                        0.142930    0.037725                3.789             < .001∗
         fricative × midpoint vs. offset
         V CONTEXT × C LANDMARK:
                                                        0.018750    0.037724                0.497                 .619
         /Ciː/ × onset vs. midpoint
         V CONTEXT × C LANDMARK:
                                                        0.075265    0.037724                1.995             < .05∗
         /Ciː/ × midpoint vs. offset
         PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                      0.044137     0.021747             2.030               < .05∗
         coronal × palatalized × fricative
         PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER:
                                                        0.091012    0.021748                4.185             < .001∗
         dorsal × palatalized × fricative
         PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                        0.042311    0.021747                1.946                 .052
         coronal × palatalized × /Ciː/
         PLACE × SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT:
                                                      0.038588     0.021748             1.774                   .076
         dorsal × palatalized × /Ciː/
         SECOND. ARTIC. × MANNER × V CONTEXT:
                                                      0.052341     0.015404             3.398               < .005∗
         palatalized × fricative × /Ciː/
         SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT × C LANDMARK:
         palatalized × /Ciː/ × onset vs.              0.019854     0.037726             0.526                   .599
         midpoint
         SECOND. ARTIC. × V CONTEXT × C LANDMARK:
         palatalized × /Ciː/ × midpoint vs.           0.064211     0.037726             1.702                   .089
         offset
         ∗
             = Statistically significant at α = .05




Model for PC3 dynamics (Section 4.7)
To assess dynamic changes in PC3 (height) over time, we computed another linear mixed-
effects model with PC3 (backness) as the dependent measure. The initial model had
the same fixed-effects and random-effects structure as the model used to explore PC1
dynamics.
    P-values were estimated from the t statistic using an upper-bound 2169 degrees of freedom
(2199 observations less the 30 fixed-effects parameters in the final model). The model has a
low amount of collinearity (κ = 2.01, VIF < 3.21 for all predictors).
40   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire




References
Allen, Blake, Douglas Pulleyblank & O.ládiı́pọ̀ Ajı́bóyè. 2013. Articulatory mapping of Yoruba vowels:
   An ultrasound study. Phonology 30(2), 183–210.
Alwan, Abeer. 1986. Acoustic and perceptual correlates of pharyngeal and uvular consonants. M.A. thesis,
   MIT.
Alwan, Abeer. 1989. Perceptual cues for place of articulation for the voiced pharyngeal and uvular
   consonants. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 86, 549.
Baayen, R. Harald. 2008. Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to statistics using R.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baayen, R. Harald, Douglas Davison & Douglas Bates. 2008. Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random
   effects for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language 59(4), 390–412.
Barr, Dale J., Roger Levy, Christoph Scheepers & Harry J. Tilly. 2013. Random effects structure
   for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and Language 68,
   255–278.
Bates, Douglas, Martin Maechler & Ben Bolker. 2011. lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes
   (R package version 0.999375-41). http://cran.r-project.org/package=lme4 (accessed April 2017).
Bolker, Benjamin, Mollie Brooks, Connie Clark, Shane Geange, John Poulsen, M. Henry Stevens &
   Jada-Simone White. 2009. Generalized linear mixed models: A practical guide for ecology and
   evolution. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24(3), 127–135.
Bolla, K. 1981. A conspectus of Russian speech sounds. Budapest: Adakemiai Kiado.
Borgstrøm, C. Hj. 1940. A linguistic survey of the Gaelic dialects of Scotland, vol. I: The dialects of the
   Outer Hebrides. Oslo: Aschehoug.
Borgstrøm, C. Hj. 1941. A linguistic survey of the Gaelic dialects of Scotland, vol. II: The dialects of Skye
   and Ross-Shire. Oslo: Aschehoug.
Borroff, Marianne. 2007. A landmark underspecification account of the patterning of glottal stop. Ph.D.
   dissertation, Stony Brook University.
Bosch, Anna. 2010. Phonology in Modern Gaelic. In Moray Watson & Michelle Macleod (eds.), The
   Edinburgh companion to the Gaelic language, 262–282. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Boyle, D. P. 1973. Generative phonology and the study of Gaelic dialects. Ph.D. dissertation, University
   of Michigan.
Breatnach, R. B. 1947. The Irish of Ring, Co. Waterford. Dublin: The Dublin Institute for Advanced
   Studies.
Brown, Morton B. & Alan B. Forsythe. 1974. Robust tests for the equality of variances. Journal of the
   American Statistical Association 69(346), 364–367.
Central Statistics Office. 2012. Profile 9: What we know. Dublin: Stationery Office. Available at
   http://www.cso.ie/en/csolatestnews/pressreleases/2012pressreleases/pressreleasecensus2011profile9
   whatweknow/ (accessed January 2014).
Choi, John & Patricia Keating. 1991. Vowel-to-vowel coarticulation in three Slavic languages. UCLA
   Working Papers in Phonetics 78, 78–86.
Dart, S. 1991. Articulatory and acoustic properties of apical and laminal articulations (UCLA Phonetics
   Lab Working Papers).
Davidson, Lisa. 2006. Comparing tongue shapes from ultrasound imaging using smoothing-spline analysis
   of variance. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 120(1), 407–415.
de Bhaldraithe, Tomás. 1945. The Irish of Cois Fhairrge. Dublin: The Dublin Institute for Advanced
   Studies.
de Búrca, S. 1958. The Irish of Tourmakeady, Co. Mayo. Dublin: The Dublin Institute for Advanced
   Studies.
Fant, Gunnar. 1960. Acoustic theory of speech production. The Hague: Mouton.
Farnetani, Edda, Andrea Provaglio, Ailbhe Nı́ Chasaide, Geraldine Fealy, Daniel Recasens,
   Jordi Fontdevila & M. Dolors Pallarues. 1991. A study of the production and coarticulatory
   characteristics of palatal and palatalized consonants (ESPRIT II, Research Action No. 3279, Progress
   Report).
                                                                     Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   41




Frank, Austin. 2014. mer-utils. https://github.com/aufrank/R-hacks/blob/master/mer-utils.R (accessed
    April 2017).
Gelman, Andrew & Jennifer Hill. 2007. Data analysis using regression and multilevel/hierarchical models.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Geng, Christian. 2007. A cross-linguistic study on the phonetics of dorsal obstruents. Ph.D. dissertation,
    Humboldt University.
Gick, Bryan. 2002. The use of ultrasound for linguistic phonetic fieldwork. Journal of the International
    Phonetic Association 32(2), 113–121.
Gorman, Kyle & Daniel Ezra Johnson. 2013. Quantitative analysis. In Robert Bayley, Richard Cameron
    & Ceil Lucas (eds.), The Oxford handbook of sociolinguistics, 214–240. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Government of Ireland. 2010. 20-year strategy for the Irish language 2010–2030. Available at
    https://www.chg.gov.ie/gaeltacht/20-year-strategy-for-the-irish-language-2010-2030/.
Gu, Chong. 2002. Smoothing spline ANOVA models. New York: Springer.
Gu, Chong. 2013. gss: General smoothing splines (version 2.0.14). http://cran.r-project.org/
    web/packages/gss/index.html (accessed April 2017).
Halle, Morris. 1959. The sound pattern of Russian. The Hague: Mouton.
Hardcastle, William J. & Nigel Hewett (eds.). 1999. Coarticulation: Theory, data, and techniques.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harrington, Jonathan, Phil Hoole, Felicitas Kleber & Ulrich Reubold. 2011. The physiological, acoustic,
    and perceptual basis of high back vowel fronting: Evidence from German tense and lax vowels. Journal
    of Phonetics 39(2), 121–131.
Harrington, Jonathan, Philip Hoole & Ulrich Reubold. 2012. A physiological analysis of high front,
    tense–lax vowel pairs in Standard Austrian and Standard German. Italian Journal of Linguistics 24(1),
    149–173.
Harshman, Richard, Peter Ladefoged & Louis Goldstein. 1977. Factor analysis of tongue shapes. The
    Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 62(3), 693–707.
International Phonetic Association (ed.). 1999. Handbook of the International Phonetic Association.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jakobson, Roman, Gunnar Fant & Morris Halle. 1952. Preliminaries to speech analysis. Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Press.
Johnson, Keith. 2008. Quantitative methods in linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Jolliffe, I. T. 2002. Principal component analysis. New York: Springer.
Kedrova, G. Ye., N. V. Anisimov, L. M. Zaharov & Y. A. Pirogov. 2008. Magnetic resonance investigation
    of palatalized stop consonants and spirants in Russian. Proceedings of the International Congress of
    Acoustics, Paris, France, 2345–2350.
Kedrova, G. Ye., L. M. Zaharov, N. V. Anisimov & Y. A. Pirogov. 2009. MRI-based contrastive study of
    nasal and oral labial consonants’ articulations in Russian. Presented at Nasal 2009, Montpellier, France.
    http://www.philol.msu.ru/kedr/kedrova-nasal.pdf (accessed January 2014).
Kochetov, Alexei. 2002. Production, perception, and emergent phonotactic patterns. New York: Routledge.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2004. Perception of place and secondary articulation contrasts in different syllable
    positions: Language-particular and language-independent asymmetries. Language and Speech 47(4),
    351–382.
Kochetov, Alexei. 2006. Testing licensing by cue: A case of Russian palatalized coronals. Phonetica 63,
    113–148.
Ladefoged, Peter & Ian Maddieson. 1996. The sounds of the world’s languages. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Lee-Kim, Sang-Im. 2014. Revisiting Mandarin ‘apical vowels’: An articulatory and acoustic study. Journal
    of the International Phonetic Association 44(3), 261–282.
Li, Min, Chandra Kambhamettu & Maureen Stone. 2005. Automatic contour tracking in ultrasound images.
    Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 19(6–7), 545–554.
Manuel, Sharon. 1999. Cross-language studies: Relating language-particular coarticulation patterns to
    other language-particular facts. In Hardcastle & Hewett (eds.), 179–198.
42   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



Matusevich, Margarita Ivanovna & Nina Aleksandrovna Liubimova. 1963. Al’bom artikuliatsii zvukov
    russkogo iazyka [Album of articulations of the sounds of the Russian language]. Moscow: Universitet
    Druzhby Narodov.
McCloskey, James. 2001. Voices silenced: Will Irish survive? Dublin: Cois Life Teoranta.
McCloskey, James. 2008. Irish as a world language. In Brian Ó Conchubhar (ed.), Why Irish? Irish
    Language and Literature in Academia, 71–89. Galway: Arlen House Press.
Mhac an Fhailigh, É. 1980. The Irish of Erris, Co. Mayo: A phonemic study. Dublin: The Dublin Institute
    for Advanced Studies.
Miller, Amanda L. 2016. Posterior lingual gestures and tongue shape in Mangetti Dune !Xung clicks.
    Journal of Phonetics 56, 119–148.
Miller, Amanda L. & Kenneth B. Finch. 2011. Corrected high-frame rate anchored ultrasound with
    software alignment. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 54, 471–486.
Nance, Claire. 2014. Phonetic variation in Scottish Gaelic laterals. Journal of Phonetics 47, 1–17.
Nı́ Chasaide, A[ilbhe]. 1990. A pilot study of articulatory and acoustic measurements of coarticulation in
    Irish (Gaelic) (Esprit II/Basic Research Action No. 3279. Progress Report).
Nı́ Chasaide, Ailbhe. 1995. Irish. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 25, 34–39.
Nı́ Chasaide, Ailbhe & Geraldine Fealy. 1991. Articulatory and acoustic measurements of coarticulation
    in Irish (Gaelic) stops. Proceedings of the 12th International Congress of Phonetic Science (ICPhS
    XII), Aix-en-Provence, France 5, 30–33.
Nı́ Chiosáin, Máire. 1994. Irish palatalisation and the representation of place features. Phonology 11(1),
    89–106.
Nı́ Chiosáin, Máire & Jaye Padgett. 2001. Markedness, segment realization, and locality in spreading. In
    Linda Lombardi (ed.), Segmental phonology in Optimality Theory: Constraints and representations,
    118–156. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nı́ Chiosáin, Máire & Jaye Padgett. 2012. An acoustic and perceptual study of Connemara Irish
    palatalization. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 42(2), 171–191.
Ó Béarra, F. 2007. Late Modern Irish and the dynamics of language change and death. The Celtic languages
    in contact: Papers from the Workshop within the Framework of the 13th International Congress of Celtic
    Studies, 260–269. Potsdam: Potsdam University Press.
Ó Cuı́v, Brian. 1944. The Irish of West Muskerry, Co. Cork: A phonetic study. Dublin: The Dublin Institute
    for Advanced Studies.
Ó Curnáin, Brian. 2007. The Irish of Iorras Aithneach. Dublin: Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies.
Ó Giollagáin, Conchúr & Martin Charlton. 2015. Nuashonrú ar an staidéar cuimsitheach teangeolaı́och ar
    úsáid na Gaeilge sa Ghaeltacht: 2006–2011 [Update report to the comprehensive linguistic study on
    the usage of Irish in the Gaeltacht: 2006–2011]. Ireland: Údarás na Gaeltachta.
Ó Raghallaigh, Brian. 2013. Fuaimeanna na Gaeilge [The sounds of Irish]. Dublin: Cois Life Teoranta.
Ó Siadhail, Mı́cheál. 1991. Modern Irish. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Öhman, S. E. G. 1966. Coarticulation in VCV utturances: Spectrographic measurements. The Journal of
    the Acoustical Society of America 39, 151–168.
Operstein, Natalie. 2010. Consonant structure and prevocalization. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Padgett, Jaye. 2001. Contrast dispersion and Russian palatalization. In Elizabeth Hume & Keith Johnson
    (eds.), The role of speech perception in phonology, 187–218. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Padgett, Jaye. 2010. Russian consonant–vowel interactions and derivational opacity. In Wayles Brown,
    Adam Cooper, Alison Fisher, Esra Kesici, Nikola Predolac & Draga Zec (eds.), Proceedings of the
    Eighteenth Formal Approaches to Slavic Linguistics Meeting (Second Cornell Meeting, 2009), 353–
    382. Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan Slavic Publications.
Perkell, Joseph S. 1969. Physiology of speech production: Results and implications of a quantitative
    cineradiographic study. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Perkell, J[oseph] S. 1990. Testing theories of speech production: Implications of some detailed analyses
    of variable articulatory data. In William J. Hardcastle & Alan Marchal (eds.), Speech production and
    speech modeling, 263–288. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Perkell, Joseph S. & Marc H. Cohen. 1989. An indirect test of the quantal nature of speech in the production
    of the vowels /i/, /a/ and /u/. Journal of Phonetics 17, 123–133.
                                                                     Connemara Irish palatalization and velarization   43




Péterváry, Tamás, Brian Ó Curnáin, Conchúr Ó Giollagáin & Jerome Sheahan. 2014. Analysis of bilingual
    competence: Language acquisition among young peole in the Gaeltacht. Dublin: An Chomhairle um
    Oideachas Gaeltachta agus Gaelscolaíochta.
Pinheiro, José & Douglas Bates. 2000. Mixed-effects models in S and S-PLUS. New York: Springer.
Proctor, Michael. 2009. Gestural characterization of a phonological class: The liquids. Ph.D. dissertation,
    Yale University.
Purcell, Edward T. 1979. Formant frequency patterns in Russian VCV utterances. The Journal of the
    Acoustical Society of America 66(6), 1691–1702.
Quiggin, Edmund C. 1906. A dialect of Donegal, being the speech of Meenawannia in the parish of
    Glenties. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
R Development Core Team. 2013. R: A language and environment for statistical computing
    (version 3.0.1). Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. http://www.r-project.org/ (accessed
    April 2017).
Recasens, Daniel. 1999. Lingual coarticulation. In Hardcastle & Hewett (eds.), 80–104.
Recasens, Daniel, Maria Dolors Pallarès & Jordi Fontdevila. 1997. A model of lingual coarticulation
    based on articulatory constraints. The Journal of Acoustical Society of America 102(1),
    544–561.
Scobbie, James, Alan Wrench & Marietta van derLinden. 2008. Head–probe stabilisation in
    ultrasound tongue imaging using a headset to permit natural head movement. In Rudolph Sock,
    Susanne Fuchs & Yves Laprie (eds.), International Seminar on Speech Production (ISSP) 8, 373–376.
    INRIA.
Shaw, Jason, Wei-Rong Chen, Michael I. Proctor, Donald Derrick & Elita Dakhoul. 2014. On the inter-
    dependence of tonal and vocalic production goals in Chinese. In Susanne Fuchs, Martine Grice,
    Anne Hermes, Leonardo Lancia & Doris Mücke (eds.), International Seminar on Speech Production
    (ISSP) 10, 395–398. INRIA.
Skalozub, Larisa Georgievna. 1963. Palatogrammy i rentgenogrammy soglasnykh fonem russkogo
    literaturnogo iazyka [Palatograms and X-ray images of Russian consonants]. Kiev: Izdatel’stvo
    kievskogo universiteta.
Slud, Eric, Maureen Stone, Paul Smith & Moise Goldstein. 2002. Principal components representation of
    the two-dimensional coronal tongue surface. Phonetica 59, 108–133.
Sommerfelt, Alf. 1922. The dialect of Torr, Co. Donegal. Christiana: Jacob Dybwad.
Stevens, Kenneth N. 1998. Acoustic phonetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stevens, Kenneth N., Samuel Jay Keyser & Haruko Kawasaki. 1986. Toward a phonetic and phonological
    theory of redundant features. In Joseph S. Perkell & Dennis H. Klatt (eds.), Invariance and variability
    in speech processes, 426–449. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stockman, Gerard. 1974. The Irish of Achill, Co. Mayo. Belfast: Queen’s University of Belfast.
Stone, Maureen. 2005. A guide to analyzing tongue motion for ultrasound images. Clinical Linguistics
    and Phonetics 19(6–7), 455–502.
Sung, Jae-Hyun, Diana Archangeli, Ian Clayton, Daniel Brenner, Samuel Johnston, Michael Hammond
    & Andrew Carnie. 2013. The articulation of Scottish Gaelic plain and palatalized consonants. Poster
    presented at Ultrafest VI, Edinburgh.
Sung, Jae-Hyun, Diana Archangeli, Ian Clayton, Daniel Brenner, Samuel Johnston, Michael Hammond &
    Andrew Carnie. 2014. The articulation of lexical palatalization in Scottish Gaelic. Poster presented at
    the 167th meeting of the Acoustical Society of America, Providence, RI.
Tiede, Mark K. 1996. An MRI-based study of pharyngeal volume contrasts in Akan and English. Journal
    of Phonetics 24, 399–421.
Wickham, Hadley. 2009. ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. New York: Springer. Available at
    http://had.co.nz/ggplot2/book (accessed April 2017).
Wrench, Alan. 2008. Articulate Assistant user guide, version 1.18. Available at http://
    materials.articulateinstruments.com/Manuals/, file Articulate Assistant Manual 118.pdf (accessed April
    2017).
Wurm, Lee H. & Sebastiano A. Fisicaro. 2014. What residualizing predictors in regression analyses does
    (and what it does not do). Journal of Memory and Language 72, 37–48.
44   Ryan Bennett, Máire Nı́ Chiosáin, Jaye Padgett & Grant McGuire



York, Richard. 2012. Residualization is not the answer: Rethinking how to address multicollinearity. Social
   Science Research 41(6), 1379–1386.
Zharkova, Natalia. 2013. A normative-speaker validation study of two indices developed to quantify tongue
   dorsum activity from midsagittal tongue shapes. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 27(6–7), 484–496.
