                                                  Irish

                                         AilbheNiChasaide

             Centre for Language and Communication Studies, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland


Irish, or Gaeilge, is a Celtic language which is spoken as a mother tongue in
                                                                                           certain parts
of Ireland, known as Gaeltacht regions. It is closely related to Scottish Gaelic and Manx,
and more distantly to Breton, Welsh and Cornish. There are three main dialects of Irish,
and although there is a written standard form there is no spoken standard accent. Written
records in Gaeilge date back to the eighth century, with a literary tradition continuing in
manuscript until the mid-nineteenth century, when published books became
commonplace. The spelling system remained relatively unchanged from around the
twelfth century until a government-sponsored reform in the mid twentieth century, but
even so, orthographic forms can be rather archaic. There is on the whole a poor
correspondence of letter to sound, as will be evident from the orthographic version of the
text below. This phonetic opacity, however, confers the advantages of morpho-
phonological transparency, and helps the written form bridge divergences between the
modern-day dialects, being relatively equidistant from the spoken forms. The description
and sample text given here is based on the speech of a native of Na Doiri Beaga, Gaoth
Dobhair, one of the Gaeltacht areas in County Donegal, situated in the north west of the
country. She is a teacher in her thirties, working in Dublin.


Consonants
Consonant quality: The most     striking feature of the consonantal system is the
phonological opposition of a series of palatalized and velarized segments. This is
accommodated in the table by subdividing the rows and placing the velarized series above
the palatalized. Consonants which do not enter into the opposition, such as [h], are placed
in the middle of a cell. The palatalized-velarized opposition serves not only for lexical

differentiation, but may also express certain grammatical functions, such as case and
number marking on nouns, e.g. [ol Y ] 61 'drink' (nom. sg.) [olJ] oil 'drink' (gen. sg.);
[b Y aed Y ], bad 'boat' (nom. sg.) [b Y aedJ] bdid 'boat' (gen. sg., and in some dialects, nom.
plur.).   Word internally, consonants in a cluster typically agree in terms of quality. The
customary term velarization is used although the secondary articulation may be further
back (in the uvular or upper pharyngeal regions) than strictly implied by the term
velarization.

   The phonetic distinctions between palatalized and velarized pairs of consonants may
involve more than secondary palatalization and velarization. In the case of the labial
consonants, the velarized segments are additionally labialized. For pairs such as IV, t Y/,
both primary and secondary features are involved. The former is a palatalized lamino-
postalveolar, which will here be referred to as alveolopalatal, and the latter is a velarized
112   Handbook of the IPA

apico-dental with contact extending onto the alveolar ridge. In the case
                                                                        of palatals and
                                                        articulation coincides with the
velars, for example /c, k/, where the primary place of
                         characterizing the phonological   series, the realizations are
secondary   articulation
transcribed in terms of primary articulation differences alone.
                                                                                          A
                                                                    Illustrations of the IP   113

Since both velarization and palatalization are generally indicated, the symbolization in the
chart is over-specified, except for palatals and velars (as mentioned above) where primary
and secondary features coincide, and /q/ and /w/ where the secondary articulation is also
implicit in the symbol. In phonological terms, it would be sufficient to mark only one
member of the opposition (traditionally the palatalized one), but this over-specification
draws attention to the auditorily striking presence of phonetic velarization in the non-
palatalized series. Strong on/off glides are generally found between velarized consonants
and adjacent front vowels.
    Alveolar laterals and nasals, and glottal fricatives, are a potentially problematic: area in
this dialect. Here it appears that an earlier opposition of palatalized/velarized segments has

been lost, or at least is in the process of being lost. As produced by the present informant,
these segments have a rather neutral quality and take their colouring from the adjacent
segments. The case of the nasals and laterals is discussed more fully below.
   In some phonological treatments, a separate series of voiceless nasals and liquids has
been posited. As such sounds occur only in certain grammatical morphemes, they are
probably best treated as sequences of nasal (or liquid) plus /h/, an analysis suggested by
Sommerfelt(1964).
    Plosives: The voiceless series is strongly postaspirated and devoicing of the voiced
series is fairly widespread, especially in non-intervocalic contexts. The voiceless series are
slightly preaspirated. Nasals and liquids before and after voiceless plosives are devoiced.

The alveolopalatal plosives IV, dV are affricated, as are the palatal plosives /c, j/, though
to a lesser degree.

   Fricatives: N'\ w, j, y/ may be realized as approximants or as fricatives. The fricatives
and approximants are grouped together because of their close relationship with their stop
congeners. An important morphophonological alternation between word-initial stops and
fricatives/approximants in Irish expresses certain grammatical functions such as present
vs. past tense, gender marking on adjectives, and case marking in certain noun phrases. In

the Gaoth Dobhair dialect, the voiceless velar fricative /x/ tends to occur only in initial
position. Where it occurs non-initially in other dialects, Gaoth Dobhair usually has /h/.
   Laterals and Nasals: Historically, there was a four-way opposition of laterals and
nasals in the dental to alveolopalatal region. This system is widely reported in the dialect
literature for Ulster (e.g. Quiggin 1906; Sommerfelt 1922;     6 Searcaigh 1925) and seems
to have involved an opposition of palatalized and velarized alveolar segments, contrasting
with a velarized dental and a palatalized alveolopalatal segment. However the present-day
situation, particularly among the younger generation in Gaoth Dobhair, is that one of the

alveolar segments has more or less disappeared, leaving a robust three way contrast, with
the possibility for some speakers of a marginal fourth phoneme. The latter was not reliably
produced by this informant. In the case of the laterals, the velarized alveolar has tended to
merge with the velarized dental /1 Y / (see Ni Chasaide 1977, 1979). In the case of the
nasals, the situation is more fluid: the palatalized alveolar has tended to merge with the
palatalized alveolopalatal nasal /nV. In lexical items which have retained the (original)
alveolar pronunciation, there does not appear to be a contrast with the (originally)
114    Handbook of the IPA

velarized alveolar.
                                                                                               or
      The remaining single alveolar lateral and nasal consonants have a fairly neutral
slightly clear quality, and tend to coarticulate freely with
                                                                 the quality of adjacent segments
                                                                   lateral and nasal segments tend
(see Ni Chasaide 1977). In prepausal position, the alveolar
to be devoiced, and to clip a preceding short vowel
                                                    making it over-short. As the alveolar
                                                                   dental, alveolar, and
nasal does not occur in initial position, illustrations of the
                                                 position are included  in the consonant
alveolopalatal nasals and laterals in word-final
word list.
                                                                             reduced to a two-way
      Rhotics: An older four-way distinction among rhotics has been
                                  Initially, the /r , r V distinction has been neutralized
                                                   Y                                       to a
distinction in Gaoth Dobhair.
voiced post-alveolar approximant [j], which takes its colouring
                                                                from the following vowel.
                                                                                      y
                                                       realized as either [r Y ] or [j ]. The
In non-initial position, the velarized member can be
historical palatalized It V,   which in most other dialects is a palatalized tap or apico-
                                                              voiced palatal fricative [ j] in
postalveolar fricative, may also appear in Gaoth Dobhair as a
                                                                  taps, there is often incomplete
non-initial position. For both palatalized and velarized
closure with considerable frication.


Vowels
                                                                             typically shown
Vowels fall into long and short sets, with long vowels (/i, e, ae, o, o, u/)
                                                                           vowels are
in the    orthography with an acute accent. Since long and short pairs of
                                                         explicitly. Long vowels have
qualitatively distinct, the transcription does not mark length
 short allophones in unstressed syllables and before Ihl.
                                                                 Schwa occurs only in unstressed
 position. The close rounded vowel is often realized
                                                     with only weak lip          rounding.




                                                                     charts represent a fairly
 Allophonic realizations: The locations of vowels marked on the
 high degree of abstraction, since consonantal quality exerts
                                                                    major influences on the
                                                             on/off glides appear when their
 quality of adjacent vowels. For all vowels, clearly audible
               backness  conflicts with  the secondary   articulation of the consonant with
 frontness or
                                                                        vowel gives rise to a
 which they co-occur. Thus, a velarized consonant preceding a front
  strong diphthongal glide of velar origin, and conversely,
                                                            a strong palatal glide is audible

  between a  palatalized consonant  and  a following back vowel.  The wide range of steady
  state realizations of short III and /a/ are illustrated by
                                                               large ellipses.
                                     5




    Illustrations of the IPA   1 1



i
Handbook of the International Phonetic Association :




A Guide to the Use of the International Phonetic Alphabet
International Phonetic Association, July 1999.
