To appear in: H. Kardela and B. Szymanek `Festschrift for Prof. E. Gussmann from his friends and
colleagues', Lublin: KUL.




                                                     2+2=3
                                      Stress in Munster Irish*


                                                  Graóyna Rowicka
                                              Leiden University / HIL
                                                 Dept. of Linguistics
                                     e-mail: Rowicka@rullet.LeidenUniv.nl



Unlike the other dialects of Modern Irish, Munster Irish1 has developed a complex quantity-sensitive
stress system. In this paper I will argue that many intricacies of the system can be untangled when
assuming a trimoraic foot as the basic foot type of Munster Irish. Foot trimoraicity results from its
double-branching. I will propose an analysis within the framework of Optimality Theory developed
by Prince and Smolensky (1993) (henceforth: PS) and McCarthy and Prince (1993a, b) (henceforth:
MPa and MPb), which affords new insights into the foot structure of Munster Irish.
    The paper is organised as follows. First I present the basic facts concerning the stress system of
Munster Irish (§ 1.1) and introduce the theoretical approach applied in this study (§ 1.2). In § 2 I
develop the analysis. I begin in § 2.1 with some evidence in favour of a trimoraic foot in Munster
Irish. In § 2.2 the structure of a doubly-branching foot is discussed. § 2.3 presents an OT analysis of
the foot structure and main stress assignment in Munster Irish. § 2.4 I point out some predictions
which follow from the analysis proposed in this paper and adduce some more evidence in its favour.
§ 3 sums up the findings of the previous sections.


*   An earlier version of this paper has been written for a 1994 HIL course on stress in Optimality Theory, independently
    of the article by Gussmann (1994). I consider it a remarkable coincidence that, despite the different theoretical
    frameworks adopted, the analyses proposed in both studies share a number of affinities. The present paper does not aspire
    to cover the stress facts of Munster Irish in such an exhaustive way as Gussmann's, but rather concentrates on the insights
    and predictions offered by the framework of Optimality Theory.

1   Munster is the southernmost province of Ireland.
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH




1. Introduction
1.1 The stress facts of Munster Irish


Stress assignment in Munster Irish is generally insensitive to the morphological complexity of words,
i.e. it treats underived and derived words (including compounds) on a par (see Ó Siadhail 1989). Only
syllables containing a long vowel or a diphthong count as heavy. Consonants in the coda do not
contribute to syllable weight.2 Moreover, vowels resulting from epenthesis between a sonorant and
a non-homorganic consonant generally behave the same as underlying ones (see Ó Siadhail 1989).
The patterns of primary and secondary stress are given below and illustrated with examples.3


    (1)       Words of two syllables:
              a) Ll                     solas                            [sólMs]                    `light'
              b) lH                     garsún                           [garsú:n]                  `boy'
              c) Hl                     cúram                            [kú:rMm]                   `care'
              d) hH                     díomhaoin                        [dji:ví:nj]                `idle'




2   Complications such as the apparent influence of /ax/ sequences on stress will not be considered in this paper. Doherty
    (1991) observes that syllables containing /ax/ may attract stress, but only in the second position of the word. He suggests
    that this bizarre behaviour is related to the high sonority of the vowel /a/. Moreover, certain affixes are said to violate the
    predicted patterns by attracting stress and some others by avoiding stress. Gussmann (1994) points out that these
    deviations involve only a handful of examples which may be treated as lexical exceptions.

3   Examples in this paper are taken from Breatnach (1947), Ó Cuív (1944) and (1947), mostly after Doherty (1991), largely
    preserving the original orthography and transcription. (1o) and (6a,b) are due to Gussmann 1994). Note that in Irish
    orthography accent marks represent underlying long vowels, whereas in phonetic transcription they mark stress. Unlike
    in the original, transcriptions in this paper include the (default) initial primary stress as well as the secondary stress
    assigned according to the description given in Ó Cuív (1944:67). Non-initial secondary stress is said to be optional (see
    Ó Cuív 1944 and Ó Sé 1989).

                                                               2
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



             Words of three syllables:
             e) Lll                 anagal                    [ánMgMl]              `corrupt matter'
             f) LlH                 moltachán                 [mòlhMxÜ:n]           `wether'
             g) lHl                 frithálamh                [frjihÜ:lMv]          `entertain'
                                                                             j
             h) lHh                 cruinniúcháin             [kriõú:xá:n ]         `(political) meetings'
             i) Hll                 tiodhlacadh               [tj'MilMkM]           `gift'
             j) HlH                 ughdardhás                [ú:dMr`á:s]           `authority'
             k) hHl                 réasúnta                  [re:sú:ntM]           `reasonable'
             l) hHh                 máirnéulaíocht            [má:rnjé:li:xt]       `navigation'
             Words of four syllables:
             m) Llll                anamacha                  [ánMmMxM]             `souls'
             n) LllH                patalachán                [p'ÜtalMx`á:n]        `plump creature'
             o) HlHl                fógrófar                  [fò:gMró:fMr]         `will be announced'


     where l     - light syllable
             L - light syllable with secondary stress
             L - light syllable with primary stress
             h   - heavy syllable
             H - heavy syllable with secondary stress
             H - heavy syllable with primary stress
             [á] - vowel with primary stress
             [à] - vowel with secondary stress


On the basis of disyllabic words it can be concluded that heavy syllables attract stress (cf. (1)b and
(c)). Stress is initial in words of light syllables only, but non-initial in words of heavy syllables only.
These generalisations are also true with respect to longer words. The stress on the initial light syllable
instead of the heavy one in `lllh' words (cf. (1)n) may suggest that stress assignment is restricted to
the first three syllables.
     Different stress placement in words containing light and heavy syllables suggests that the system
is weight-sensitive. Initial stress in sequences of light syllables points to left-headed, i.e. trochaic, foot
structure. However, Munster Irish stress does not yield to a straightforward analysis in terms of


                                                      3
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



bimoraic trochees and the initial End Rule (Prince 1983), which would predict incorrectly initial stress
in (1)d, (f), (k) and (l). To account for these patterns, Doherty (1991) has suggested word-initial foot
extrametricality on the condition that the extrametrical foot is directly followed by another foot. The
condition on extrametricality protects initial stress in the words in (1)j and (n) parsed as (h)l(h) and
(ll)l(h). However, the analysis runs into another problem: initial stress in (1)i and (m) can only be
derived without extrametricality. Doherty's way out is to postulate that extrametricality is inapplicable
because these words contain only one foot each: (h)ll and (ll)ll. Light syllables in non-initial position
within the word are not parsed into feet.
    To sum up, an analysis of Munster Irish stress in terms of bimoraic trochees necessitates such
ad hoc mechanisms as foot extrametricality conditioned by strict foot adjacency and a ban on
footifying light syllables non-initially within the word.4 Still, it predicts incorrectly initial stress in
(1)o, whose pattern has been left out of Doherty's (1991) study.
    In this paper I will propose an alternative account of the Munster Irish stress facts within the
framework of Optimality Theory, an account which does not necessitate language-specific theoretical
innovations. It makes appeal to general prosodic well-formedness conditions whose role in other
languages has been well-documented in the OT literature. Two new constraints are proposed which,
however, are analogical to those which have already been well-established. The basic tenets of the
framework are presented below.



1.2 The framework


The framework adopted in this paper is that of Optimality Theory, as presented in PS and MPa and
MPb. This approach focuses on well-formedness conditions governing the output of the phonological
component (and the grammar in general), rather than on rules modifying its input. What differentiates
it from other frameworks developed in this spirit is the view that well-formedness constraints do not
have to be surface-true. The selected outputs of the phonological component may violate some
constraints, provided that they are still `optimal'. Optimality involves best satisfaction of a hierarchy
of constraints which may sometimes be in conflict.



4   Doherty (1991) also considers and rejects an alternative account in terms of iambic feet.

                                                           4
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



    The set of possible well-formedness constraints is part of Universal Grammar, which also
contains the functions Gen(erate) and Eval(uate). The former generates a large set of candidate
outputs for each given input which are then evaluated by the function Eval with respect to the system
of well-formedness constraints. Any two possible outputs are compared and such evaluation defines
the degree of relative success of each candidate with respect to the others. Constraints are
hierarchically arranged. Low-ranked ones can be violated in an optimal output in order to satisfy
higher-ranked ones, but not vice versa. Individual grammars are constructed by imposing a language-
specific ranking on the universally given set of possible well-formedness constraints. Constraints may
also differ cross-linguistically in the setting of certain parameters.
    The fundamentals of Optimality Theory are thus the following (after MPa):


    (2)      Principles of Optimality Theory
             a. Violability
                 Constraints are violable; but violation is minimal.
             b. Ranking
                 Constraints are ranked on a language-particular basis; the notion of minimal violation
                 is defined in terms of this ranking.
             c. Inclusiveness
                 The candidate analyses, which are evaluated by the constraint hierarchy, are admitted
                 by very general considerations of structural well-formedness; there are no specific
                 rules or repair strategies with specific structural descriptions or structural changes
                 or with connections to specific constraints.
             d. Parallelism
                 Best-satisfaction of the constraint hierarchy is computed over the whole hierarchy
                 and the whole candidate set.


The analysis presented in this paper crucially hinges on these aspects of Optimality Theory. The
notation used in the constraint tableaux evaluating various candidate outputs is explained in the
appendix to this paper.




                                                    5
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



2. Analysis
2.1 Ternary feet in Munster Irish


Previous analyses of Munster Irish have generally taken initial stress to be default. However, this
conclusion seems controversial if words with sequences of equally stressable elements, namely heavy
syllables, are considered. Their behaviour suggests that primary stress is preferably non-initial and,
if also possible, non-final (cf. (1)h, (k) and (l)). Primary stress is found word-initially only in cases
where the word begins with a heavy syllable followed by a light one (cf. (1)i, (j), or with three light
syllables (cf. (1)e, (m) and (n). The sequences of `hl' and `lll' apparently have some stress-attracting
properties.
    Compare the stress patterns given in (1)n and (f) above and repeated below as (3)a and (b).


    (3)       a) LllH             patalachán                 [pÜtalMx`á:n]
    `plump creature'
              b) LlH              moltachán                  [mòlhMxÜ:n]           `wether'


In both cases the initial light syllable and the heavy syllable bear prominence, which indicates that they
are heads of feet. However, in (3)a primary stress falls on the first foot of the word while in (b) it falls
on the second. Given a bimoraic trochee as the foot type, as assumed by Doherty (1991), both words
contain two identical feet (ll) and (h), with the third light syllable in (3)a left unparsed. The difference
in primary stress assignment remains a puzzle.
    On the other hand, if a trimoraic trochee is adopted as the basic foot type in Munster Irish, the
word in (3)a consists of a trimoraic foot followed by a bimoraic one: (lll)(h). The stress-attracting
property of the first foot is its trimoraicity, as opposed to the bimoraicity of the second foot. The
same holds for `hl' sequences footified into trimoraic trochees. Furthermore, if a word contains more
than one trimoraic foot, e.g. (hl)(hl) (cf. (1)o), the non-initial foot receives primary stress. Under such
an analysis, primary stress assignment in Munster Irish can be described in terms of the following
algorithm:




                                                     6
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



     6 Create trimoraic or, if not possible, bimoraic feet within the word;
     6 Put main stress on a trimoraic foot, if possible;
     6 Stress a non-initial foot, if possible;
     6 If possible, stress a non-final foot of the word.


Given such an algorithm words given in (1) above have the prosodic structure shown in the respective
right-hand columns below. Syllables predicted to bear primary stress are underlined.


     (4)     a) Ll                (ll)                     i) Hll              (hl)l
             b) lH                l(h)                     j) HlH              (hl)(h)
             c) Hl                (hl)                     k) hHl              (h)(hl)
             d) hH                (h)(h)                   l) hHh              (h)(h)(h)
             e) Lll               (lll)                    m) Llll             (lll)l
             f) LlH               (ll)(h)                  n) LllH             (lll)(h)
             g) lHl               l(hl)                    o) HlHl             (hl)(hl)
             h) lHh               l(h)(h)


As can be seen, the predicted location of primary stress corresponds in all cases to the actual stress
placement. Moreover, the heads (i.e. the left-most syllables) of other feet coincide with the location
of secondary stress, except for those cases (with heavy syllable sequences) where a stress clash would
result.
     Thus, an analysis adopting a trimoraic trochee as the basic foot type in Munster Irish accounts
correctly for all the facts presented in (1). It also makes further predictions with respect to the
location of main stress. It anticipates that a trimoraic foot will be stressed, no matter whether it is
within or outside the `three syllable window' postulated in the literature. Consider some hypothetical
sequences of light and heavy syllables given in the left-hand column below. The present account
predicts for them the foot structure and main stress location given in the middle column. For
comparison, the foot structure and stress pattern predicted by Doherty's (1991) analysis are given in
the right-hand column:




                                                   7
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



     (5)                        present analysis             Doherty's analysis
             a. llhhl           (ll)(h)(hl)                  (ll)(h)(h)l
             b. lllhl           (lll)(hl)                    (ll)l(h)l
             c. hhhhl           (h)(h)(h)(hl)                (h)(h)(h)(h)l


As can be seen above, the predictions following from the present analysis and that of Doherty's differ
crucially.
     Words with the relevant structure are missing from the data considered in most studies of
Munster Irish stress. In this respect Gussmann (1994) constitutes a noteworthy exception. Consider
some examples which he brings to light (following the source, secondary stress is not marked):


     (6)     a. llhHl           imigéiniúla               [imige:njú:lM]      `distant-NOM-PL'
             b. lllHl           eadargála                 [ádMrMgÜ:lM]        `mediation-GEN-SG'


The words above are of the structure considered in (5)a and (b) above. It is immediately clear that
they confirm the predictions of the present analysis and not that of Doherty's.



2.2 A doubly-branching foot


A foot dominating three moras may be viewed as having flat structure, with one strong branch and
two weak ones. However, it has also been proposed in the literature (see Dresher and Lahiri 1991,
and Rice 1992) that foot ternarity may result from its double-branchingness. A foot of this type
dominates two branches, one strong and one weak, of which the strong branch itself also dominates
two elements. The two structural possibilities are represented below:




                                                   8
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



    (7)     Trimoraic feet
            a. flat                       b. doubly-branching
              F                              F
              *       \      \               *        \
               s      w    w                  s           w
              *       *      *               *        \   *
              µ       µ      µ               µ        µ   µ


             where `µ' - mora


In what follows I will argue for a doubly-branching structure for trimoraic feet in Munster Irish.



2.3 An OT account
2.3.1 Foot structure


Within OT the foot structure of a language follows from the language-specific way in which universal
constraints on foot well-formedness are ranked. Left-headedness within the foot is required by
RHTYPE = TROCHEE (PS). This constraint does not itself demand branching within the foot, but only
rules out right-headed feet. Branchingness is due to another constraint, well-documented cross-
linguistically (see, e.g. Prince 1980, McCarthy and Prince 1986, Kager 1989, Hayes 1991 as well as
PS). In the OT literature the following formulation of FOOT BINARITY has been adopted:


    (8)     FTBIN
            Feet must be binary under syllabic or moraic analysis.




                                                  9
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



Crucially, this constraint requires branching of the foot node itself 5, and not anywhere within the
foot. RHTYPE and FTBIN together will favour binary left-headed feet over other foot types.
    To derive ternary feet, another constraint must occupy a high position in the hierarchy, which
will demand branching within the head of the foot. It can be formulated as follows:


    (9)      HEADBIN (cf. HeadBranch in van der Hulst 1994)6
             The head of the foot must be branching.


In order to satisfy both FTBIN and HEADBIN feet have to be doubly-brancing: at the level of the foot
head and at the level of the foot node itself. This results in ternary foot structure.
    FTBIN and HEADBIN may sometimes be in conflict. If there are only two moras available, they
can either be parsed as a branching foot with a non-branching head, or as a non-branching foot with
a branching head. Both parsing are represented in (10)a and (b), respectively:


    (10)        a.       F                      b.       F
                         *       \                       *
                         s      w                        s
                         *       *                       *        \
                         µ       µ                       µ        µ


The tableau in (11) below evaluates both parsings with respect to the two relevant constraints. As
shown in the tableau, a different candidate parsing will be selected depending on the relative ranking
of HEADBIN and FTBIN. The ranking FTBIN >> HEADBIN will favour the parsing represented in


5   To be precise, FTBIN in this formulation rules out not only degenerate feet, but also unbounded feet and ternary feet with
    flat structure as represented in (7)a above. I will not address here the issue of whether this is desirable in all cases, or
    whether a more general formulation should instead be adopted. See, e.g. van der Hulst (1994) where branching is
    demanded, rather than specifically binarity. Moreover, in Rowicka (1994) I argue for two separate FTBIN constraints
    which require binarity at the syllabic and the moraic level of analysis. However, for the purposes of the present analysis
    this division is insignificant.

6   According to OT, where all constraints are assumed to be present in all languages, HEADBIN is also supposed to be
    present in the constraint hierarchies of languages which do not allow for ternary feet. As argued by van der Hulst (1994),
    in such languages HEADBIN is ranked below (and hence `disactivated' by) NOLAPSE which rules out sequences of two
    unaccented syllables/moras. Hung (1993) postulates another constraint, RHYTHM, which can have the same effect if
    ranked above HEADBIN. There is independent motivation for a constraint of the type NOLAPSE or RHYTHM.

                                                             10
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



(10)a, while HEADBIN >> FTBIN will favour that in (10)b. In the tableau below the relevant
constraints are not ranked and the winning candidate is not indicated. The actual ranking in Munster
Irish will be established below.


    (11)     Evaluation tableau for bimoraic feet


            Candidates                      HEADBIN                         FTBIN

      F
      sw                                        *
      µµ
      F
      s                                                                       *
      µµ



Consider now another constraint which governs parsing into feet. In all the parsings in (4) syllable
integrity is respected: moras of heavy syllables are never parsed into different feet in order to achieve
the optimal ternary foot structure. For instance, in terms of the number of moras the sequence `hhl'
in (4)k is identical to `hlh' in (4)j and can be parsed analogically, with the two moras of the second
heavy syllable split up between two feet: (hµ)(µl). However , such a candidate output must bear
primary stress on the first heavy syllable since this is the head of a trimoraic foot, while in the selected
output stress falls on (the first mora of) the second heavy syllable. The principle which rules out
parsings such as (hµ)(µl) can be formulated as the following constraint:


    (12)     SYLLABLE INTEGRITY
             Moras of a syllable cannot be divided between different metrical constituents.


SYLINT is never violated in Munster Irish in that moras of a heavy syllable are never split up between
two feet.




                                                    11
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



    The head and the dependent branch within one foot can also be regarded as `different metrical
constituents'. If this interpretation is taken into account, the constraint also disallows dividing
tautosyllabic moras between the strong and the weak branch of the same foot. Evidence that SYLINT
in this sense is also respected in Munster Irish can be found in the behaviour of `lh' sequences (cf.
(1)b, (g) and (h) above). Such a trimoraic sequence could itself constitute a ternary foot, with the
head dominating the light syllable and the first mora of the heavy syllable, as shown below:


    (13)              F
                      *      \
                      s            w
                      *      \     *
                      µ     µ      µ
                      *      *     /
                      l     h


The foot represented above should bear stress on its first mora, i.e. on the light syllable. However,
the primary stress on the heavy syllable in (1)b, (g) and (h) shows that parsings such as that in (13)
are never selected. Heavy syllables are always included as a whole into the foot head, even at the cost
of leaving a preceding light syllable unparsed. I conclude that SYLINT in either interpretation is
inviolable in Munster Irish.
    Given the high ranking of SYLINT, heavy syllables will preferably be parsed into branching heads
of non-branching feet (cf. (10)b), irrespective of the ordering between FTBIN and HEADBIN. Evidence
for the relative ordering of the latter two constraints can, however, be found in the parsing of light
syllable sequences, where SYLINT is redundant. As observed above, if FTBIN dominates HEADBIN,
two light syllables will be parsed as in (10)a, i.e. differently from two moras of a single heavy syllable.
In a language with such a constraint ordering a sequence `ll' will form a branching foot (with a non-
branching head), while a heavy syllable will form (the branching head of) a non-branching foot, due
to SYLINT. One can expect that, given the structural distinction between `ll' feet and `h' feet, the two
kinds of feet may behave differently, for instance, in primary stress assignment, since the `h' foot type
is in a way degenerate. No such difference is evident in Munster Irish. For instance, `(ll)(h)' words
have the same stress pattern as `(h)(h)' words (cf. (4)f and (d). I conclude that in Munster Irish `ll'


                                                    12
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



sequences and heavy sylables are parsed the same, namely, as represented in (10)b. Such parsings are
selected due to the domination of HEADBIN over FTBIN.
     The behaviour of `llh' and `hh' sequences provides evidence for the high ranking of another
constraint on foot structure. Such sequences can be parsed as single feet where both the head and the
dependent are branching, to the satisfaction of both HEADBIN and FTBIN:


     (14)       a.      F                                         b.   F
                        *       \                                      *   \
                        s              w                               s       w
                        *       \      *       \                       *   \    *
                        µ       µ      µ       µ                       µ   µ    µ     µ
                        *       *      *       /                       *   /    *
                         l      l      h                               h        h


Feet like this, however, should bear stress on their first syllable, which prediction is counterevidenced
by the data in (1)f and (d). Apparently, in Munster Irish heavy syllables are never included in the foot
as the weak branch. As observed by Hayes (1980), in weight-sensitive systems heavy syllables are
usually prohibited from occupying weak metrical positions. PS adopt the following formulation of
this principle (cf. also Prince 1990):


     (15)     Weight-to-Stress Principle (WSP)
              Heavy syllables are prominent in foot structure and on the grid.


Apart from the dependent foot branch, a ternary foot contains one more weak metrical position,
namely the right branch of the foot head. If heavy syllables are allowed in this position, the sequence
`lhl' is parsed as a single foot:7




7    Dresher and Lahiri (1991) argue for such feet in Germanic.

                                                          13
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



    (16)       F
               *      \
               s            w
               *      \     *
               l      h      l


The above structure satisfies both HEADBIN and FTBIN, but it violates WSP since a heavy syllable
occupies a weak metrical position. In such a foot stress is predicted to fall on the foot head, i.e. on
the first light syllable. However, `lhl' words in Munster Irish are stressed on the heavy syllable instead
(see (1)g above). The selected parsing for `lhl' words is not that given in (16). I conclude that in
Munster Irish heavy syllables are never parsed in any weak position within the foot, which indicates
that WSP is inviolable.
    To sum up, the discussion carried out in this section has pointed out the relevance of the
following well-formedness constraints for foot structure assignment in Munster Irish:


    (17)     Constraint hierarchy governing foot structure in Munster Irish
             RHTYPE = T, SYLINT, WSP, HEADBIN >> FTBIN.


These constraints guarantee that feet in Munster Irish are left-headed and have a branching head. Foot
structure respects syllable integrity. Weak positions within the foot may only dominate one mora.
Branching feet are preferred to non-branching ones.
    In the following section I will concentrate on the constraints responsible for main stress
assignment in Munster Irish.



2.3.2 Main stress assignment


In Munster Irish trimoraic feet attract stress stronger than bimoraic feet. This preference for locating
the prominence peak of the word on the foot dominating the greatest number of moras might be
attributed to the constraint PEAK-PROMINENCE (PS, after McCarthy and Prince 1986):




                                                   14
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



    (18)     PEAK-PROMINENCE
             Peak (x) ™ Peak (y) if *x* > *y*


By this constraint, the element x is a better peak than y if the intrinsic prominence of x is greater than
that of y. Greater intrinsic prominence may denote greater metrical weight, as in the analysis of a
Hindi dialect that PS present. I suggest, however, that reference to intrinsic prominence may be more
suitable in the case of indisputably prominence-driven stress systems analysed in terms of `unbounded'
feet. A more straightforward account can be proposed for the stress system of Munster Irish.
    Recall that, given the domination of HEADBIN over FTBIN, trimoraic feet are the only ones which
branch. Bimoraic feet, on the other hand, have binary heads, but do not branch themselves. Compare
the structures below:


    (19)       a.     F                                 b.    F
                      *     \                                 *
                      s           w                           s
                      *     \      *                          *     \
                      µ     µ      µ                         µ     µ


                    a trimoraic foot                         a bimoraic foot


I propose to express the preference for a trimoraic foot to bear the word's main stress in terms of a
requirement that the head of the prosodic word must be branching:


    (20)     PWHEAD BIN
             The head of the prosodic word must be branching.


PWHEADBIN, HEADBIN and FTBIN form a family of constraints which demand that elements of
prosodic structure be binary.
    PWHEADBIN is violated in words which do not contain any trimoraic feet, but only bimoraic
ones, e.g. (h)(h) from (4)d. One of the feet must bear main stress, although it does not branch. The
violation of PWHEADBIN is forced by the undominated constraints SYLINT and WSP which discard
any other foot structure for such words. There is also evidence that in Munster Irish PWHEADBIN

                                                   15
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



is ranked below HEADBIN. Consider again `llh' words (cf. (4)f). As argued in § 2.3.1, high ranked
HEADBIN selects the parsing in which two light syllables are the head of a non-branching foot.
Therefore `llh' words contain two non-branching feet. Such outputs violate PWHEADBIN. The latter
constraint would select another candidate output where `ll' is a branching foot (with a non-branching
head) and the p-word head. This parsing violates HEADBIN. Both candidate outputs of `llh' words are
represented in (21)a and (b) respectively. `F' (in bold print) indicates the p-word head. Main stress
falls on the head of the foot which is the p-word head, i.e. on the heavy syllable in (21)a and on the
initial light syllable in (21)b. The stress pattern predicted in (21)b is incorrect. In the selected output
(cf. (4)f) the non-branching foot (h) is the p-word head, which indicates that the foot (ll) is not
branching either. This gives evidence for the ranking HEADBIN >> PWHEADBIN in Munster Irish.
    (21)       a.     F            F                     b.   F            F
                      *            *                          *     \      *
                      s            s                          s     w      s
                      *      \     *                          *     *      *
                      l      l     h                          l     l      h


              HEADBIN >> PWHEADBIN                            PWHEADBIN >> HEADBIN


The interaction of WSP, HEADBIN, PWHEADBIN and FTBIN is illustrated in the tableau below for
some candidate parsings of `hh' and `llh' words.




                                                    16
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



      (22)   Interaction of WSP and binarity requirements


      Candidates            WSP            HEADBIN         PWHEAD BIN            FTBIN

  F
  sw                         *!
  hh
  F F
  s s        7                                                    *                **
  h h

  F     F
  s     s 7                                                       *                **
  ll h
  F     F
  sw s                                         *!                                   *
  l l h
  F
  s    w                     *!
  ll h



For `hh' words the first candidate output is excluded by WSP because it contains a heavy syllable in
a weak metrical position. The second candidate wins although it violates some binarity requirements.
For `llh' words WSP rules out the third candidate, the second candidate loses with respect to
HEADBIN, and the first candidate is selected. The behaviour of words containing only bimoraic feet
with respect to primary stress assignment, such as (ll)(h), (h)(h) and (h)(h)(h), indicates the relevance
of other constraints on the location of the p-word head. The main stress on the second foot in words
of the structure (ll)(h) and (h)(h) shows that the p-word head should not be p-word-initial. On the
other hand, the main stress on the medial foot in (h)(h)(h) sequences shows that it should preferably
not be p-word-final either. The observation that many languages tend to avoid locating the p-word
head at the right edge of the p-word has led to the postulation of the constraint NONFINALITY (PS):

                                                    17
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



    (23)     NONFINALITY
             No head of p-word is final in p-word.


NONFINALITY favours candidate outputs in which primary stress is assigned to a nonfinal foot in the
p-word, for instance, to the second foot in the sequence (h)(h)(h). However, in words of only two
feet it would incorrectly predict initial stress. The fact that the final, rather than the initial, foot is
primarily stressed in (ll)(h) and (h)(h) sequences indicates that NONFINALITY is dominated by a
constraint which rules out the p-word-initial location of the p-word head. The constraint in question
is then a mirror image of NONFINALITY. I propose to formulate it as follows:


    (24)     NONINITIALITY
             No head of p-word is initial in p-word.


The function of NONFINALITY and NONINITIALITY in a constraint-based framework such as OT is
analogical to extrametricality in earlier approaches. As in the case of final vs. initial extrametricality,
substantial evidence is adduced in the OT literature for NONFINALITY, but not for NONINITIALITY.
To my knowledge the latter has not yet in fact been formulated as a constraint. However, the
theoretical framework of OT does not rule it out. On the contrary. The well-established constraint
NONFINALITY is antagonistic to one of the ALIGN-Right constraints (MPa) which demands that the
p-word head occupies the rightmost position within the p-word. Whether a language exhibits final
extrametricality effects or not depends, among other factors, on the relative ranking of NONFINALITY
and ALIGN-Right. Given that ALIGN-Left (MPa) demands the leftmost location of the p-word head
within the p-word, one may anticipate a competing constraint in the system, which is precisely
NONINITIALITY. The reason why the impact of the latter constraint is not noted in the literature may
be related to the special significance of the left p-word edge and the usually strong position of
ALIGN-Left constraints cross-linguistically. However, the stress facts of Munster Irish seem to offer
positive evidence in favour of NONINITIALITY.
    The effects of NONINITIALITY and NONFINALITY are evident if all feet within the p-word have
the same structure, i.e. they are all branching or all non-branching. If there is only one branching foot,
it is assigned main stress irrespective of its location within the p-word. This provides evidence for the
ranking PWHEADBIN >> NONINITIALITY >> NONFINALITY. The interaction of the three constraints
governing primary stress assignment is illustrated in the tableau below:

                                                    18
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



      (25)   Interaction of constraints on primary stress assignment


        Candidates            PWHEAD BIN              NONINITIALITY           NONFINALITY

  F     F                          *!                                               *
  hl h
  F     F    7                                              *
  hl h

  F F                              *                       *!
  h h
  F F        7                     *                                                *
  h h

  F F F                            *                       *!
  h h h
  F F F       7                    *
  h h h
  F F F                            *                                               *!
  h h h



For `hlh' words PWHEADBIN eliminates the candidate output in which a non-branching foot is
assigned primary stress in favour of the candidate where a branching foot is stressed. In the case of
`hh' words both candidates violate PWHEADBIN. Therefore the selection is done by the lower ranked
constraint NONINITIALITY which is only satisfied by the second candidate output. As far as `hhh'
words are concerned, all the three candidates score the same regarding PWHEADBIN and
NONINITIALITY rules out only the first candidate. The choice between the second and the third
candidate is determined by NONFINALITY in favour of the second.




                                                 19
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



3. Conclusion


In this paper I have developed an OT analysis of stress in Munster Irish. It has been proposed that
the basic type of foot in this language is a trimoraic trochee. Foot ternarity results from the fact that
the foot has a binary-branching head and it branches itself. Such feet attract main stress. Moreover,
main stress is preferably non-initial and, if also possible, non-final within the p-word. It has been
argued that these properties of Munster Irish stress system are due to several universal constraints
on the well-formedness of prosodic structure. Their ranking in Munster Irish is the following:


     (26)     Constraint hierarchy governing foot structure and main stress
              in Munster Irish


              RHTYPE = T, SYLINT, WSP, HEADBIN >>
              FTBIN, PWHEADBIN >>
              NONINITIALITY >>
              NONFINALITY


An essential premise of OT, as opposed to other constraint-based approaches, is that lower ranked
constraints can be violated in the selected outputs in order to satisfy higher-ranked ones. I hope to
have demonstrated that this is indeed the case in Munster Irish and thus to have shown the adequacy
of the framework of OT in the analysis of the Munster Irish stress system.



Appendix: constraint tableau notation


*                Constraint violation.
!                Fatal violation - candidate loses against at least one other candidate.
<>               Unparsed material.
Dotted line      Constraints not crucially ordered.
Shading          Constraint plays no role in the evaluation of the candidate.
7                The optimal candidate.


                                                   20
GRAòYNA ROWICKA



Acknowledgements


    I would like to thank Eithne Carlin, Colin Ewen, Harry van der Hulst, Edmund Gussmann,
    Krisztina Polgárdi, Ruben van de Vijver, Jeroen van de Weijer and the anonymous reviewer for
    their comments on an earlier version of this paper. I am the only one to blame, of course.



References


de Bhaldraithe, T. (ed.). (1959). English-Irish Dictionary. Dublin, OiFig an tSoláthair.
Breatnach, Risteard B. (1947). The Irish of Ring Co. Waterford. Dublin, Dublin Institute for
Advanced Studies.
Dinneen, P.S. (ed.). 1927). Foclóir Gaedhilge agus Béarla: An Irish-English Dictionary. Dublin,
the Irish Texts Society.
Doherty, C. (1991). Munster Irish Stress. In Phonology at Santa Cruz, vol. 2, 19-32.
Dresher, B.E. and A. Lahiri (1991). The Germanic Foot: Metrical Coherence in Old English.
Linguistic Inquiry 22, 251-86.
Gussmann, E. (1994). Putting Your Best Foot Forward. Ms, Catholic University of Lublin.
Hayes, B. (1980). A Metrical Theory of Stress Rules. PhD diss., MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Hayes, B. (1991). Metrical Stress Theory: Principles and Case Studies. Ms, UCLA.
Hulst, H.G. van der (1994). Notes on Foot Typology and Optimality Theory. Ms, Holland Institute
of Generative Linguistics, Leiden and the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Science, Wassenaar.
Hung, H. (1993). The Rhythmic and Prosodic Organization of Edge Constituents. PhD diss.,
Brandeis University, Waltham.
Kager, R. (1989). A Metrical Theory of Stress and Destressing in English and Dutch. Dordrecht,
Foris.
McCarthy, J.J. and A.S. Prince (1986). Prosodic Morphology. Samizdat, Amherst and Waltham, MA.
McCarthy, J.J. and A.S. Prince (1993a). Generalized Alignment. Yearbook of Morphology, 79-153.
McCarthy, J.J. and A.S. Prince (1993b). Prosodic Morphology I. Ms, University of Massachusetts
at Amherst and Rutgers University. [Forthcoming MIT Press.]
Ó Cuív, Brian (1944). The Irish of West Muskerry, Co. Cork. A Phonetic Study. Dublin, Dublin
Institute for Advanced Studies.

                                                21
STRESS IN MUNSTER IRISH



Ó Cuív, Brian (1947). Cnósach Focal ó Bhaile Bhúirne i gCunndae Chorcaí. Dublin, Institiúid Árd-
Léighinn Bhaile Atha Chliath, Baile Atha Cliath.
Ó Dónail, N. (1977). Foclóir Gaeilge-Béarla. Dublin, OiFig an tSoláthair.
Ó Sé, D. (1989). Contributions to the Study of Word Stress in Irish. Ériu XL, 147-78.
Ó Siadhail, M. (1989). Modern Irish. Grammatical Structure and Dialectal Variation. Cambridge,
University Press Cambridge.
Prince, A.S. (1983). Relating to the Grid. Linguistic Inquiry 14, 19-100.
Prince, A.S. and P. Smolensky (1993). Optimality Theory: Constraint Interaction in Generative
Grammar. Ms, Rutgers University, New Brunswick and University of Colorado, Boulder.
[Forthcoming MIT Press.]
Rice, C. (1992). Binarity and Ternarity in Metrical Theory: Parametric Extensions. PhD diss.,
University of Texas, Austin.
Rowicka, G.J. (1994). Prosodic Optimality and Prefixation in Polish. Paper presented at the Prosodic
Morphology Workshop in Utrecht. To appear in the Proceedings.
Vijver, R. van de (1994). Main Stress in Munster Irish. A Case of Non-Morphological Reduplication.
Ms, Free University Amsterdam.




                                                22
