TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10   15:56   Page 2049




              86          Morpheme Structure
                          Constraints
                          Geert Booij




              1   Introduction
              Morpheme structure constraints are constraints on the segmental make-up of the
              morphemes of a language. A textbook example of such a constraint is that bnik
              is an impossible morpheme of English, whereas blik is a possible English mor-
              pheme that happens not to exist. Hence, bnik is a systematic gap in the morpheme
              inventory of English, whereas blik is an accidental gap in this inventory. This can
              be taken to imply that there is a morpheme structure constraint that prevents English
              morphemes from beginning with a /b/ followed by a nasal consonant.
                 Halle (1959: 38) proposed to account for such distributional generalizations by
              means of morpheme structure rules, which define the class of possible morphemes
              of a language. Morpheme structure rules were conceived of as rules that fill in
              predictable specifications of the sound segments of a morpheme. For instance,
              in the case of English morphemes that begin with the consonant cluster bC, such
              as brick, it is predictable that the C must be a liquid, i.e. a non-nasal sonorant
              consonant. That is, the feature specifications [−nasal] and [+sonorant] of the second
              consonant of brick are predictable. They can therefore be omitted in the lexical
              phonological specification of the relevant morphemes. Morpheme structure rules
              fill in the blank cells of the lexical phonological matrix, and thus turn this under-
              specified matrix into a systematic phonological matrix, with all feature values of
              its segments specified. This is the underlying phonological form of a morpheme
              to which the phonological rules of a language apply. In sum, morpheme structure
              rules function as redundancy rules that specify predictable information, and at
              the same time they define the set of possible morphemes of a language.
                 Stanley (1967) proposed to replace Halle’s notion “morpheme structure rule”
              by the notion “morpheme structure condition” (MSC). All morpheme structure
              conditions function as redundancy statements with respect to fully specified
              lexical phonological matrices, which form the input for the phonological rules
              (P-rules).
                 The notion “morpheme structure condition” as discussed above forms part of
              the theoretical machinery of classical generative phonology, but has been subject
              to debate. In this chapter this debate will be summarized. Before doing that,
              I will provide some examples of phonotactic properties of morphemes in §2. The
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10      15:56   Page 2050




              2050        Geert Booij

              problems raised by the concept of “morpheme structure condition” will then be
              discussed in §3–§5. These problems are the following:

              i.     The redundancy problem: is there any need for a specific set of morpheme
                     structure conditions, or can they be made to follow from other types of phono-
                     logical rules or constraints? (§3 and §4)
              ii.    The duplication problem: how can we avoid the same distributional gen-
                     eralization (for example the homorganicity of a nasal consonant and a
                     following obstruent in consonant clusters) being expressed by both an MSC
                     and a phonological rule (P-rule), and thus making the grammar unnecessarily
                     complex? (§4)
              iii.   The status of MSCs: are they absolute constraints, or statistical tendencies
                     only? (§5)

              The chapter will conclude with some observations on the expressive functions
              of morphemes with specific phonotactic properties (§6) and a summary of our
              findings on the status of MSCs (§7).


              2      Morpheme structure conditions
              The unequal distribution of phonemes across words and morphemes was an
              important topic of research in structuralist phonology, because distributional facts
              were interpreted as signaling the presence or absence of grammatical boundaries,
              as in the work of Trubetzkoy (Wiese 2001). For instance, in German the phoneme
              /j/ only occurs at the beginning of lexical morphemes (as in jagen ‘to hunt’ and
              its derivative verjagen ‘to chase away’). Hence, the presence of the /j/ is a posi-
              tive signal of a left-edge morpheme boundary (van Wijk 1939: 125). Such facts
              show that the phonological and grammatical dimensions of linguistic structure
              are not completely autonomous, but are related in a systematic fashion (Jakobson
              1949). The relation between the distribution of phonemes and grammatical units
              such as morphemes and words is therefore an aspect of the interface between
              phonology and morphology. Jakobson (1949) drew attention to the fact that dif-
              ferent grammatical units may have different phonotactic properties. For instance,
              he observed that of the 23 Czech consonants, only eight are found in inflectional
              suffixes. Jakobson also mentioned that only the following consonants appear in
              the inflectional suffixes of English: /z d n I/.
                 Dutch exhibits a number of such asymmetries between lexical morphemes on
              the one hand and derivational and inflectional suffixes on the other (Booij 1995).
              For Dutch, the following generalizations hold:

              (1)    a.   Suffixes may consist of consonants only (/s/, /t/ or a combination
                          thereof).
                     b.   Suffixes may begin with the vowel /H/.
                     c.   Suffixes may have /H/ as their only vowel.

              Lexical morphemes of Dutch, on the other hand, do not have the phonotactic
              possibilities listed in (1) for suffixes, and require the presence of at least one full
              vowel (that is, a vowel that is not /H/; see chapter 26: schwa), and cannot be
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10     15:56      Page 2051




                                                               Morpheme Structure Constraints       2051

              schwa-initial. Dutch prefixes cannot begin with a schwa either, but can have the
              schwa as their only vowel, as is the case for the Dutch prefix be- /bH/. Thus, we
              can sometimes tell from the phonological make-up of a morpheme whether it is
              a lexical morpheme or an affix.
                 A famous type of morpheme structure constraint is the restricted distribution of
              consonants in Semitic roots (see chapter 108: semitic templates). Most Semitic
              roots are triliteral, that is, they contain three consonants, the consonantal skeleton.
              These skeletons are intercalated with vowels, and these vowel patterns are the
              exponents of grammatical information. Greenberg (1950) observed that the first
              two consonants of a Semitic CCC skeleton cannot be identical, whereas the last two
              can. Furthermore, homorganic consonants, i.e. consonants with the same place of
              articulation, are excluded, unless they are identical, even if they are the last two
              consonants. This is exemplified by the following distributional patterns in Arabic:

              (2)   *m-m-d
                     m-d-d       ‘to stretch’
                     f-r-r       ‘to flee’
                    *b-m-C
                    *C-b-m
                    *g-k-C
                     œ-k-k       ‘to split’
                    *œ-k-g

              Similar facts are reported for Modern Hebrew in Bar-Lev (1978: 321): “well-formed
              roots contain only consonants from different places of articulation.” For instance,
              the following patterns can be observed in existing Modern Hebrew roots (cf. also
              Berent et al. 2002):

              (3)   labial – velar – dental        bagad   ‘to betray’
                    velar – labial – dental        gibor   ‘hero’
                    dental – velar – labial        dégem   ‘model’
                    labial – dental – velar        mélex   ‘king’

              Crucially, these constraints apply to morphemes only; hence they are tautomor-
              phemic constraints. As McCarthy (1986: 209) observes, there is no Arabic root tatak,
              with two identical consonants, but there are inflected forms of verbs like ta-takallam
              ‘you converse’ in which the first t belongs to a prefix, and hence does not belong
              to the same morpheme as the second t. Thus the prohibition on identical con-
              sonants is not violated.
                 McCarthy (1986) proposes to analyze this constraint as following from the
              Obligatory Contour Principle (OCP), which states that identical elements on the
              melodic tier of a morpheme are not permitted (see chapter 14: autosegments). If
              the OCP applies to the lexical representations of Arabic roots, and assuming that
              all autosegmental spreading in Arabic is rightwards, it is predicted that, of the
              following three structures, only the third one is well-formed (McCarthy 1986: 209):

              (4)   a. C     V     C    V     C    b. C    V    C   V    C    c. C    V   C     V    C

                        s          m          m       s                  m        s       m
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10   15:56    Page 2052




              2052     Geert Booij

              In (4a), the OCP is violated on the melodic tier, whereas in (4b) leftward spread-
              ing has taken place. Hence, if the V is /a/, the root *sasam is excluded, and only
              the root samam is well-formed. In order to exclude sequences of homorganic but
              not identical consonants as well, the OCP must be interpreted here as OCP-Place.
              That is, assuming that there is a separate tier for Place specifications of sounds,
              OCP-Place forbids adjacent identical specifications on the Place tier, and this excludes
              adjacent homorganic consonants (including identical ones, which by definition have
              the same specification on the Place tier).
                 Phonotactic properties of morphemes may also reveal that they belong to a
              particular stratum of the lexicon of that language, and may differentiate between
              native and borrowed morphemes (see chapter 95: loanword phonology). Itô
              and Mester (1995: 819) mention examples of constraints from several languages
              that are specific for native morphemes of those languages. Japanese is interest-
              ing in that its morphemes can be divided into four subclasses: Yamato (native),
              Sino-Japanese, Foreign and Mimetic. Each subclass is characterized by a set of
              constraints, some of which are valid for more than one subclass. For instance,
              Sino-Japanese roots consist of one syllable only, and Lyman’s Law (morphemes
              contain at most one voiced obstruent) holds for Yamato morphemes only (Itô and
              Mester 1995).
                 Dutch words that begin with pn- in the spelling, such as pneumatisch ‘pneumatic’
              and pneumonie ‘pneumonia’, betray their non-native origin: pn- is a well-formed
              word-initial consonant cluster in Greek, but not in Dutch. This suggests that
              morphemes with pn- do not belong to the set of possible native morphemes of
              Dutch, and the constraint *[pn- partially characterizes the set of native Dutch
              morphemes. In English this constraint applies to all morphemes, and hence the
              combination pn- is realized as /n/.
                 The range of phonotactic patterns found in morphemes may be smaller than
              those in words. English morphemes, for instance, never end in a cluster of voiced
              obstruents (there are no morphemes like *lovd or *dubd), whereas such clusters
              do occur in complex words like past tense forms of verbs (as in loved /vd/, and
              dubbed /bd/). Dutch morphemes are subject to the constraint that voiced obstruent
              clusters only occur in complex words: morpheme-internally we only find clus-
              ters like /pt/ and /st/, but in complex words we find clusters like /bd/ and /zd/,
              as in the past tense forms eb-de /ebdH/ ‘receded’ and raas-de /ra(zdH/ ‘raged’. The
              only exceptions to this Dutch MSC are a few loanwords like labda /lAbda(/ ‘lambda’
              and budget /[bœ–et/ ‘budget’. Hence, the occurrence of voiced obstruent clus-
              ters morpheme-internally makes the relevant Dutch morphemes recognizable as
              loans (Zonneveld 1983).
                 As observed by Shibatani (1973), MSCs may have a different status from
              phonological rules or constraints, in that loanwords are not necessarily adapted
              to the MSCs of a borrowing language, whereas the application of the phono-
              logical constraints cannot be suppressed. Hence, the Dutch loan labda keeps its
              voiced obstruent cluster, and is not pronounced as la[pt]a. Dressler (1985: 219–245)
              also provides examples from various languages of distributional patterns that are
              characteristic of morphemes.
                 In sum, there are distributional constraints that are characteristic of morphemes,
              but not of words in general. The question is whether and how they have to be
              accounted for by a specific type of constraint, the MSC.
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10   15:56   Page 2053




                                                         Morpheme Structure Constraints      2053


              3     The redundancy problem
              As we saw above, in classical generative phonology constraints on the seg-
              mental composition of (lexical) morphemes are interpreted as lexical redundancy
              rules or morpheme structure constraints (MSCs) (Halle 1959, 1964; Stanley 1967;
              Chomsky and Halle 1968). For instance, in many languages, nasal consonants in
              morpheme-internal clusters share their place of articulation with a following con-
              sonant. This generalization can be expressed by omitting the place of articulation
              of the nasals in the lexical representation of the relevant morphemes. A lexical
              redundancy rule will then fill in the proper value for the feature [place], and
              thus derive fully specified underlying phonological representations to which the
              phonological rules of a language apply. Thus, in the phonological component
              of the grammar the set of rules that express static phonotactic generalizations is
              ordered to apply before the set of phonological rules that account for alternations.
              The two sets of rules (MSCs and phonological rules) together are considered to
              express all the phonotactic regularities of a language (Postal 1968: 214; see also
              chapter 7: feature specification and underspecification).
                 The role and importance of MSCs have been questioned for a number of reasons.
              In the first place, as pointed out by Hooper (1972), the role of the syllable as a
              domain of phonotactic generalizations cannot be ignored. The notion “syllable”
              does not play any formal role in the type of generative phonology codified in
              Chomsky and Halle (1968), but since then a wealth of evidence for the crucial
              role of the syllable (and larger prosodic units such as the foot and the prosodic
              word) in phonological analysis has been amassed (Nespor and Vogel 1986). Con-
              straints on syllable structure are by definition constraints on how phonemes can
              combine into larger units. Hence, a lot of constraints on phoneme sequences are
              in fact syllable structure constraints (Hooper 1972). For example, the constraint
              that an English word cannot begin with a consonant cluster of the type nasal
              + obstruent follows from the universal principle of syllable structure that the
              sonority of consonants must decrease towards the edges of the syllable (see
              chapter 49: sonority). Thus, sequences like *mpat and *ntak are impossible
              English morphemes. This means that morphemes must have a phonological
              composition that will lead to well-formed prosodic structures.
                 A second argument for the syllable as a phonotactic unit is that we cannot
              determine whether a particular segmental string is ill-formed without taking syl-
              labification into account. For instance, the consonant sequence /bkm/ is always
              phonotactically ill-formed in English, because there is no possible division across
              two syllables that leads to a sequence of well-formed syllables. On the other hand,
              the consonant cluster /kn/, which does not appear word-initially in English
              words, can appear word-internally, as in acne, because this word can be syllabified
              as ak.ne, with two well-formed syllables (dots indicate syllable boundaries). That
              is, the following generalization holds:

              (5)   A (grammatical) word is phonotactically well-formed iff it can be parsed
                    exhaustively into one or more well-formed prosodic constituents.

              The class of well-formed syllables and higher prosodic constituents (foot,
              prosodic word) can be defined by the prosodification algorithm of each language,
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10    15:56   Page 2054




              2054      Geert Booij

              which is partially universal and partially language-specific. This algorithm groups
              the sounds of words into syllables, feet, and prosodic words (Rubach and Booij
              1990). Alternatively, the grammar contains a set of ranked prosodic constraints
              that determine the optimal prosodification of a string of sounds, as in Optimality
              Theory (Kager 1999).
                 We might therefore claim that MSCs are superfluous because phonotactic
              restrictions on morphemes can be seen as the effects of phonological constraints
              on the output forms of words. For instance, English does not have a morpheme
              abkmer, since this morpheme cannot be prosodified exhaustively: the /k/ cannot
              be made part of the first or the second syllable. Similarly, the reason that a
              Dutch lexical morpheme requires the presence of at least one full vowel is that,
              otherwise, such a morpheme cannot yield a well-formed prosodic word. Dutch
              suffixes, on the other hand, can be vowelless or contain the vowel /H/ only, as
              mentioned in (1), because they always combine with a lexical morpheme. That
              is, the phonotactic shape of Dutch suffixes has to do with their being dependent
              on a host morpheme to which they attach. We might therefore consider these
              suffix-specific phonotactic properties as something that need not be expressed
              separately, since it follows from the mapping of morphological structure onto
              prosodic structure.
                 Hooper (1972) offers a second argument against MSCs, that formulating
              phonotactic constraints with the morpheme as domain may also lead to spurious
              generalizations. For instance, Dutch lexical morphemes of Romance origin may
              end in obstruent clusters that are unpronounceable in isolation:

              (6)    castr-eer  ‘castrate’
                     celebr-eer ‘celebrate’
                     emigr-eer ‘emigrate’
                     penetr-eer ‘penetrate’

              One might conclude that Dutch morphemes can end in clusters of the type /Cr/,
              but this generalization does not reveal what is really at stake: those morphemes
              are only acceptable because they are bound roots, obligatorily followed by a vowel-
              initial suffix. Hence, these consonant clusters will form proper syllable onsets,
              as in pe.ne.treer. Similar observations can be found in Kenstowicz and Kisseberth
              (1977: 145) for Tunica, and they therefore concluded that in such cases it is the
              word rather than the morpheme that is the domain of phonotactic constraints.
              Nevertheless, the occurrence of such root-final consonant clusters is revealing in
              the sense that they betray the Romance origin of those roots: Germanic roots of
              Dutch never have this form because they can be used as words without further
              suffixation.
                 A third example of the role of prosody in the phonotactics of morphemes is
              that in many languages lexical morphemes are subject to prosodic minimality
              conditions. For instance, Dutch lexical morphemes are subject to the constraint
              that they consist of at least one heavy syllable (with either a long vowel or a short
              vowel followed by a consonant). That is, a lexical morpheme cannot consist of a
              light syllable only; bimoraicity is required. It is only in exclamations like hè /he/
              that the use of such light syllables with a short vowel is possible.
                 Prosodic conditions on morphemes create a problem for the classical MSCs: the
              syllable structure of a morpheme is not part of its lexical representations, but a
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10    15:56   Page 2055




                                                        Morpheme Structure Constraints      2055

              derived property. Therefore, MSCs cannot refer to derived prosodic properties
              such as bimoraicity (McCarthy 1998). The only way to circumvent this problem
              is to phrase the constraint in terms of segment sequences: a lexical morpheme
              must contain either a long vowel, or a short vowel followed by at least once con-
              sonant. However, we then miss the generalization that it is a prosodic syllable
              weight condition that is involved. Once more, this suggests that the segmental
              composition of morphemes is governed by phonological output conditions. A
              similar problem occurs when we want to express the following generalization for
              Dutch: “In mono-morphemic forms we do not find sequences of schwa-headed
              syllables” (van Oostendorp 1995: 141). Again, this MSC refers to the derived
              property of syllable structure (cf. Downing 2006 for a cross-linguistic survey of
              prosodic minimality conditions).
                 In sum, we have to find a way in which prosodic constraints can account for
              at least part of the phonotactic constraints on morphemes.

              3.1    Non-syllabic sequential constraints
              Not all constraints on segmental sequencing can be reduced to syllable structure or
              prosodic minimality requirements. There are sequential constraints on consonant
              clusters that hold independently from the tautosyllabic or heterosyllabic status
              of these clusters. For instance, Yip (1991) proposes the following generalization
              for English (see also chapter 12: coronals):

              (7) Consonant Cluster Condition
                    In consonant clusters, consonants may have at most one other articulator
                    feature than Coronal.

              Thus, we find English clusters like /pt/ and /kt/ (apt, act), but not (tauto- or
              heterosyllabic) clusters like /kp/, /pk/, /km/, /mk/, /xm/, and /gm/ (loanwords
              like drachma and stigma are exceptions to this generalization). Note that the ill-
              formedness of such clusters does not follow from syllable structure constraints
              since they could be heterosyllabic. Yet they do not occur. If we come across such
              clusters in words (as in zipcode and backpack), we can conclude that these words
              must be compounds, consisting of more than one lexical morpheme.
                 An example of a sequential constraint that holds both for tautosyllabic and
              heterosyllabic sound sequences, observed for English by Davis (1991), and for
              Dutch by Booij (1995: 46), is that in the sequence sCVC the two Cs should not
              be identical, unless they are coronal. Here are some Dutch examples with labial
              and coronal consonants (such sequences of velar consonants do not occur for
              independent reasons):

              (8)   CVC                          sCVC
                    poep   /pup/     ‘shit’      *spoep /spup/
                    mam    /mAm/     ‘mother’    *smam /smAm/
                    toet   /tut/     ‘face’       stoet /stut/       ‘procession’

              This constraint is also valid for heterosyllabic sequences: they are not acceptable
              when followed by a vowel, as shown by forms like *spupo and *smama.
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10       15:56   Page 2056




              2056      Geert Booij

                The point that not all phonotactic constraints can be reduced to syllable struc-
              ture constraints is particularly clear for word-edge constraints, which are discussed
              in the next subsection.


              3.2     Word edges
              The difference between syllable structure constraints and sequential constraints
              is stressed by Kristoffersen (2000: 46–48), in relation to the distribution of con-
              sonants at word edges. In Norwegian, the cluster tl- is a proper syllable onset. It
              occurs word-internally in words like Be.tlem ‘Bethlehem’ and A.tle (proper name).
              Yet Norwegian words never begin with this cluster. Kristoffersen also observed
              that, although Norwegian words never begin with pn-, a cluster that does not
              violate the Sonority Hierarchy Constraint on syllable structure, Norwegians have
              no difficulty in pronouncing loan words like pneumatisk ‘pneumatic’. These
              observations imply that /tl-/ and /pn-/ are proper syllable onsets in Norwegian,
              and that the non-occurrence of initial /tl-/ and /pn-/ is not due to a syllable
              structure constraint, but to a constraint that holds for the left edge of Norwegian
              root morphemes or prosodic words. A similar example from Dutch is that lexical
              morphemes do not begin with pj-, tj-, or kj-; however, the diminutive suffix
              allomorphs -pje, -tje, -kje begin with these clusters, and hence these clusters do
              appear in word-internal syllable onsets, as in riem-pje ‘belt-dim’ with the prosodic
              structure ((rim)q(pjH)q)w (w = prosodic word, q = syllable). Therefore, the non-
              occurrence of these clusters cannot be attributed to a syllable structure constraint.
              The word-initial sequences /pj- tj- kj-/ do occur in borrowed proper names for
              male persons, such as Pjotr, Tjeerd, Kjeld, and they do not cause pronunciation
              problems for speakers of Dutch.
                 The edges of words may have special phonotactic properties, since they may
              either impose more restrictions than what syllable well-formedness requires, or
              allow for extra consonants compared to what is possible in syllables in general.
              The Norwegian examples above (no tl- or pn- at the beginning of a word) are
              a case in point. Other examples of more restricted phonotactics at word edges
              can be found in Booij (1983): in Huichol, for example, words cannot end in a
              consonant but syllables can (source: Bell 1976).
                 In Polish, extra consonants may be added in word-initial position that violate
              the universal Sonority Sequencing constraint (Rubach and Booij 1990: 434; see also
              chapter 109: polish syllable structure):

              (9)    rwao     ‘tear’
                     rfza     ‘rust’
                     lgnÓo    ‘stick’
                     mdÓy     ‘tasteless’
                     mnich    ‘monk’

              In these words, a sonorant consonant is followed by a consonant of the same or
              higher degree of sonority, in violation of the Sonority Sequencing requirement
              that the sonority of consonants must increase towards the direction of the nucleus.
              The account that Rubach and Booij (1990) propose is that Polish prosodic words
              have an extra optional word-initial slot for an extrasyllabic consonant preceding
              the regular syllables, which is exempt from the requirements of the Sonority
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10   15:56   Page 2057




                                                         Morpheme Structure Constraints       2057

              Sequencing condition. This analysis implies that allowing for these marked con-
              sonant clusters is not to be seen as a property of lexical morphemes, but of the
              prosodic words that corresponds with such morphemes.
                 The special phonotactics of word edges is dealt with in Optimality Theory
              in the form of alignment constraints (McCarthy and Prince 1993). The basic idea
              of this approach, which makes crucial use of ranked output constraints in
              computing the phonetic form of words, is that there are alignment constraints
              that require the alignment of prosodic and grammatical boundaries. According
              to McCarthy and Prince (1993), the language Axininca Campa has word-initial
              onsetless syllables, whereas word-internally a vowel hiatus must always be filled
              by an epenthetic consonant. The relevant alignment constraint blocks the inser-
              tion of an epenthetic consonant in word-initial position. If epenthesis took place,
              there would be no alignment of the left edge of the prosodic word with the left
              edge of the (vowel-initial) morpheme. That is, the alignment constraint is ranked
              higher than the constraint that penalizes empty onsets. Note, however, that this
              analysis does not directly express that the left edges of Axininca Campa morphemes
              can begin with a vowel, even though syllables in this language normally begin
              with a consonant. The alignment mechanism allows for a difference in make-up
              between the edges of morphemes and syllables, but does not express it.

              3.3   Phonotactic differences between simplex and
                    complex words
              As briefly mentioned at the end of §2, the range of phonotactic patterns in mor-
              phemes may be smaller than in complex words. Harris (1994) presents a number
              of observations on the phonotactic differences between simplex words and com-
              plex words in English. For instance, one will not find a heterosyllabic sequence
              /pt/, as in laptop, within a morpheme (except for loans like helicopter), even though
              a heterosyllabic cluster /pt/ would not violate the syllable structure constraints
              of English: a syllable can end in a /p/, and begin with a /t/. The same applies
              to the cluster /pw/: a proper name like Sopwith, which is historically a compound,
              is exceptional in this respect, and thus betrays its historical origin as a compound.
              Such opaque compounds tend to be adapted to the phonotactic patterns. The proper
              name Greenwich with the sequence /nw/ is now pronounced without the /w/,
              thus adapting to the phonotactic constraints for monomorphemic words (Harris
              1994: 51).
                 The observation that certain consonant clusters only occur at morpheme
              boundaries is often used in linguistic analyses for assigning multi-morphemic
              status to words (see chapter 46: positional effects in consonant clusters).
              For instance, many words in the Amerindian language Athapaskan are con-
              sidered to be compounds, even though the constituents do not occur as words
              by themselves, because they contain consonant clusters that are characteristic of
              morpheme boundaries (Rice 2009: 546).
                 Phonotactic differences between root morphemes and complex words have
              also been observed for vowel harmony (cf. §4 for a more detailed discussion
              of such facts for Turkish). The necessity of a separate morpheme structure con-
              dition on vowel combinations in roots is explicitly defended in the analysis of
              Hungarian vowel harmony in Vago (1976); see also chapter 123: hungarian vowel
              harmony. Harvey and Baker (2005: 1459) observed that in the Australian language
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10     15:56   Page 2058




              2058      Geert Booij

              Warlpiri, a language with vowel harmony with respect to the feature [round], the
              sequence [−round][+round] is not permitted for two consecutive vowels (with inter-
              mediate consonants) within roots, whereas the disharmonic sequence [+round]
              [−round] is. They account for this difference not by assuming an agreement
              constraint, but by proposing separate constraints for each type of disharmonic
              sequence. In addition, there is a constraint of root identity that requires the
              feature specifications for [round] to be preserved in the output. Thus they do not
              need to assume two rules of vowel harmony, a morpheme structure constraint
              and a phonological constraint that applies to complex words, and the duplica-
              tion problem is avoided. Note, however, that this analysis requires reference to
              the root, a type of morpheme, as the domain of an identity constraint. That is,
              reference to morphemes in phonological constraints is still required.
                 Different phonotactics may also play a role in recognizing the lexical category
              of a word. In Dutch, there is a marked difference in phonological make-up
              between simplex nouns and simplex verbs. Verbs tend to consist of at most two
              syllables; if there is a second syllable, it will end in a schwa followed by a liquid.
              Nouns, on the other hand, allow for a larger variety of phonological structures,
              such as those consisting of three or more syllables, or ending in a full vowel. It
              appears that speakers of Dutch are able to categorize words as nouns or verbs
              on the basis of such phonotactic knowledge (Don and Erkelens 2006).
                 In sum, the distributional properties of segments within morphemes relate
              to the phonological rules or constraints of the relevant language, but not all
              morpheme-internal phonotactics can be reduced to these more general phonological
              regularities. In the words of Stanley (1967: 397): “The constraints holding within
              single morphemes are more restrictive than the constraints which characterize
              larger units.”


              4      The duplication problem
              The problem that the assumption of both MSCs and P-rules seems to lead to
              unnecessary complications of the grammar was noted by Stanley (1967). For
              instance, Turkish has two general P-rules of vowel harmony that also predict
              the distribution of vowels within morphemes: all vowels agree in backness, and
              high vowels agree in roundness (see chapter 118: turkish vowel harmony).
              As Zimmer (1969: 310) points out:

                  The restrictions on vowel co-occurrence within almost all bases of Turkic origin are
                  nearly the same as those just described for suffix vowels; thus for the “harmonic”
                  part of the lexicon, there are two MSC’s which replicate, to a great extent, the
                  vowel-harmony rules that determine the selection of vowels in suffixes. There is,
                  however, a large number of loanwords to which these vowel harmony MSC’s do
                  not apply, – e.g. /günah/ ‘sin’, /kalem/ ‘pen’, /sosis/ ‘sausage’, /viraN/ ‘curve’.

              In addition, there is an MSC that does not double as a P-rule, the Labial
              Consonant MSC (Zimmer 1969: 312):

              (10)    After /a/, a [+high] vowel agrees in labiality with a preceding [+labial]
                      consonant.
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10   15:56   Page 2059




                                                         Morpheme Structure Constraints       2059

              An example of a morpheme that obeys MSC (10) is karpuz ‘watermelon’, in which
              the second vowel is round, even though the first vowel is non-round. This is an
              interesting MSC for the debate on the redundancy of MSCs, since it has no P-rule
              counterpart.
                 This duplication problem, already noted by Stanley (1967), is discussed by
              Anderson (1974: ch. 16). Anderson observes that many Turkish morphemes such
              as kitap ‘book’ are disharmonic, but do not block the application of vowel har-
              mony rules once they have been suffixed. Anderson therefore concludes that we
              need both MSCs and P-rules for vowel harmony in Turkish, since they may be
              subject to different idiosyncrasies. In Anderson’s view, the relation between
              MSCs and P-rules dealing with vowel harmony is a functional one, which need
              not and cannot be expressed formally by unifying them into one rule.
                 Shibatani (1973) proposes that such constraints should be considered to be both
              MSCs and Surface Phonetic Constraints (SPCs). A constraint can be marked as
              an MSC, a SPC, or both an MSC and a SPC. Clayton (1976) argues that constraints
              that hold for underlying forms of morphemes only are unmotivated, and do not
              reflect the speaker’s knowledge of his/her language. Therefore, Clayton claims
              that Surface Phonetic constraints suffice.
                 The duplication problem is also considered by Kiparsky (1982: 167–170), in the
              framework of Lexical Phonology (see also Kaisse and Shaw 1985: 25; chapter 94:
              lexical phonology and the lexical syndrome). In this framework, phonolog-
              ical rules apply cyclically. Rules apply either in a structure-adding fashion or
              in a structure-changing one. Rules only apply in a structure-changing fashion in
              derived environments, i.e. in environments created by the previous application
              of a morphological or a phonological rule (see Booij 2000 for a survey of this
              theory). Kiparsky (1982) proposed that there are no Morpheme Structure Rules.
              The lexical representations of morphemes are underspecified; that is, predictable
              properties are omitted. On the first cycle, phonological rules specify these fea-
              tures; i.e. they fill in the blanks. If a word is complex, the same rule can apply in
              a structure-changing fashion on the next cycle, since the complex word is a derived
              environment. For instance, the Dutch rule that requires obstruents to have the
              same specification for the feature [voice] as an adjacent obstruent can be applied
              as a blank-filling rule to the underspecified feature matrix for /x/ in a word like
              achter /AxtHr/ ‘back’, and it can be applied in a structure-changing fashion in a
              complex word like as-bak ‘ash-tray’ (underlying /As-bAk/; phonetic form [AzbAk]).
              In English, the place of articulation of the nasal consonant in damp can be left
              unspecified, and filled in by the rule of Nasal Place assimilation, whereas the same
              rule will change the underlying coronal nasal /n/ into [m] in the derived word
              compress (underlyingly con-press).
                 Such an analysis can also deal with exceptions to MSCs. For instance, the Dutch
              word imker //mkHr/ ‘bee-keeper’, which is synchronically a simplex word, vio-
              lates the constraint on homorganicity of nasal–obstruent clusters. In Kiparsky’s
              proposal, this is no problem: the nasal consonant will be fully specified as being
              labial, and the rule that predicts the feature [velar] for a nasal followed by /k/
              is blocked from applying because feature-changing applications of this rule are
              allowed in derived environments only.
                 In the case of Turkish vowel harmony, the same solution would apply.
              Disharmonic roots are fully specified, and therefore the P-rules of vowel harmony
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10   15:56   Page 2060




              2060     Geert Booij

              are blocked from applying to these morphemes, whereas they will apply in
              derived environments, to the vowels of the suffixes.
                In short, in Kiparsky’s proposal, the duplication problem is solved by
              abolishing the class of morpheme structure rules, and having P-rules apply in two
              different fashions. However, not all types of generalizations over the phono-
              logical shape of morphemes mentioned above can be expressed this way. This
              applies in particular to prosodic conditions on the shape of morphemes.

              4.2    MSCs in Optimality Theory: Lexicon optimization
                     and output–output faithfulness
              Optimality Theory (OT) does not allow for constraints on the inputs of phono-
              logical evaluation. Output constraints are the only mechanisms for expressing
              phonotactic patterns. This idea of OT is referred to as the Richness of the Base
              hypothesis. For instance, there is no input constraint that forbids the morpheme
              *bnik as a morpheme of English. The output constraints will penalize such a form,
              and evaluate this form in such a way that the optimal output form is not faithful
              to this form, but different, e.g. blik. Since forms such as bnik will never surface
              in English, it does not make sense to store an underlying form bnik for blik. This
              is the effect of lexicon optimization. Thus, the phonological output constraints
              of a language will be reflected by the input forms. This point of view is fore-
              shadowed in Sommerstein (1974: 73), who argued that judgments about whether
              a sound sequence is a possible morpheme must be made on the basis of surface
              representations.
                 This idea is discussed in more detail in McCarthy (1998, 2002, 2005), and
              can be illustrated as follows. Suppose there is a language with the constraint that
              obstruents are voiceless at the end of a syllable, and with the suffix /-Hn/ as plural
              ending for nouns, as in [hut] – [hutHn] ‘hat(s)’. Furthermore, this language has
              no alternations of the type [hut] – [hudHn]. That is, morphemes that end in an
              obstruent will always end in a voiceless obstruent. Given the word [hut], the
              Richness of the Base hypothesis implies that we might assume the underlying form
              /hud/ for the singular form. The correct phonetic form [hut] will be computed
              anyway. However, in an optimal lexicon the underlying form to be chosen
              will be /hut/ because of lexicon optimization. This means that of the possible
              tableaux that select the right form, the most harmonic one will be selected, i.e.
              the one with the minimal number of violations of constraints. The assumption
              of the underlying form /hud/ will imply violation of the input–output (IO)
              faithfulness condition, unlike the underlying form /hut/. IO faithfulness requires
              the underlying form to be selected as the surface form, unless it is overruled by
              higher-ranked constraints. The optimal underlying form can be selected by com-
              parison of tableaux, and the selection of the most harmonic one. Thus, lexicon
              optimization makes restrictions on input forms superfluous.
                 If there are no MSCs, the question arises of how to account for constraints that
              hold for morphemes only. One example of a distributional difference between
              morphemes and words concerns the distribution of nasals in Dutch. Within
              morphemes, nasal consonants are always homorganic with a following obstruent
              (with the exception of imker; cf. §4.1). Hence, we find damp /dAmp/ ‘damp’, tand
              /tAnt/ ‘tooth’ and dank /dAIk/ ‘thanks’, but no morphemes ending in */-mt -mk
              -Ip -It/. On the other hand, complex words such as the 3rd singular present forms
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10   15:56   Page 2061




                                                         Morpheme Structure Constraints       2061

              of verbs always end in /-t/, preceded by all three types of nasals: klim-t ‘climbs’,
              zon-t ‘sunbathes’, zing-t /z/It/ ‘sings’. If we assume a markedness constraint NC
              (nasals are homorganic with a following consonant), this constraint must be
              blocked from changing a verb form like klimt into klint. McCarthy (1998) argued
              that this can be achieved by making use of output–output (OO) correspondence
              constraints. If we rank OO faithfulness conditions for the relation between a base
              word and its derivatives higher than the markedness constraint NC, a verb form
              like klimt cannot be changed to klint, because this would violate the requirement
              of correspondence of the stem of this inflected form with the verbal stem klim.
                 Nasal assimilation should not be blocked in all derived environments, however.
              In a prefixed word like compress, the prefix-final /n/ of con- does assimilate to
              the next /p/. This can be accounted for if we assume that the NC constraint is
              ranked higher than faithfulness to the underlying form of the prefix, /kDn/. The
              more general observation is that affixes tend to adapt to roots rather than the other
              way around. Hence, in OT analyses it is often assumed that faithfulness constraints
              for affixes rank lower than those for roots (Alderete 2003). This implies that con-
              straints have to be indexed for particular morphological categories such as root
              and affix. Therefore, we have to allow for reference to morphological domains in
              a system of phonological output constraints.


              4.3   Domains and strata
              Our conclusion so far is that, even when we do not allow for constraints on
              underlying forms of morphemes, it should be possible to index a phonological
              output constraint for a particular morphological domain such as the lexical
              morpheme. This will make it possible to specify distributional constraints that hold
              for lexical morphemes only. For instance, the Dutch constraint that lexical mor-
              phemes and prefixes cannot begin with /Cj/, whereas suffixes can, is expressible
              by indexing this constraint for the relevant morphological domains.
                 As observed in §3, particular phonotactic properties may only hold for certain
              strata of the lexicon. This is discussed in detail for Japanese by Itô and Mester
              (1995, 1999, 2001), who argue that “phonological generalizations can be covert
              by being lexically partial: they hold within a subdomain of the lexical space, but
              are violated in peripheral areas occupied e.g. by loanwords or onomatopeia” (Itô
              and Mester 2001: 274). For instance, in Japanese the palatalization constraint that
              changes /t/ into /ts/ before /i/ (this constraint also excludes tautomorphemic /ti/
              sequences) does not affect loanwords like English tea and party. Therefore, Itô and
              Mester defend the idea of stratum-specific (ranking of) faithfulness constraints.
                 A Dutch example of a stratum-specific constraint was mentioned in §2: in native
              Dutch morphemes morpheme-internal obstruent clusters are always voiceless, but
              this constraint does not hold for non-native morphemes such as labda /lAbda(/
              ‘lambda’, or the brand name Mazda /mAzda(/. Such non-native morphemes
              preserve their foreign pronunciation. The word labda, for instance, will not be
              changed to [lApta(], and Dutch speakers will recognize it as a loan due to this
              phonological property. Another example is the word-initial cluster sk-, which does
              not occur in Dutch native words, but only in loans from English, e.g. scan and
              Skype.
                 A similar distinction between native and non-native morphemes can be
              observed for languages with vowel harmony: non-native lexical morphemes may
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10   15:56    Page 2062




              2062     Geert Booij

              be disharmonic, and this is not changed through application of the vowel harmony
              constraints. For instance, the Hungarian noun soför ‘chauffeur’ is disharmonic (the
              first vowel is back, the second one is front), and remains so, even though it selects
              its suffix vowels in accordance with the frontness/backness vowel harmony
              constraint.
                 In sum, phonological constraints may have to be indexed for particular mor-
              phological categories or for lexical strata.


              5     Absolute constraints or tendencies?
              A final important point of debate concerning MSCs is whether they are absolute
              constraints or just statistical tendencies. Zimmer (1969) investigated the psycho-
              logical reality of the Labial Consonant MSC of Turkish (10) mentioned above. Recall
              that this constraint holds for morphemes only, and is not supported by the two
              P-rules of vowel harmony. Zimmer made up lists of pairs of nonsense words, and
              asked subjects, Turkish students in California, to determine which word of such
              a pair sounds more like a word that might actually occur in Turkish. In the case
              of word pairs where the P-rules of vowel harmony played a role, the results were
              as expected, with a strong preference for the word in accordance with the vowel
              harmony constraints. For the pairs that involved the Labial Consonant MSC,
              on the other hand, there was hardly any difference in number between expected
              responses (the words in accordance with the MSC) and unexpected responses.
              Zimmer (1969: 320) therefore concluded that an MSC that is not supported by a
              P-rule might not be internalized by native speakers of Turkish.

              5.1    OCP-Place
              The psychological reality of OCP-Place, discussed in §2, which excludes identical
              adjacent place specifications, has been investigated for speakers of Jordanian
              Arabic (Frisch and Zawaydeh 2001; Frisch et al. 2004). It appears that “Jordanian
              Arabic speakers do recognize systematic gaps that are violations of OCP-Place as
              different from accidental gaps involving unrelated consonant pairs” (Frisch and
              Zawaydeh 2001: 99), even though there are violations of OCP-Place. Frisch et al.
              (2004) argue that OCP-Place is not an absolute, universal constraint. They con-
              sider the constraint as reflecting the generalizations that Arabic speakers make
              on the basis of their lexicon. OCP-Place is claimed to be a gradient constraint,
              since there are quite a number of words that violate it, but in different degrees.
              “Forms that violate the constraint to a lesser degree are more frequent than
              forms that violate the constraint to a greater degree” (Frisch et al. 2004: 182). Frisch
              et al. also point out that the co-occurrence of homorganic consonants that are
              non-adjacent (occurring in the first and third positions) is less restricted than the
              co-occurrence of adjacent homorganic consonants. In other words, the OCP-Place
              constraint is a gradient, but psychologically real constraint: “the native speaker
              knows an abstract but gradient OCP Place constraint (‘Roots with repeated
              homorganic consonants are unusual’) based on generalizations over the statist-
              ical patterns found in the lexicon” (Frisch et al. 2004: 216).
                 Frisch et al. also looked at the effect of OCP-Place on the borrowing of Italian
              verbs in Maltese, a variety of Arabic with many loans from Italian. The number
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10       15:56   Page 2063




                                                             Morpheme Structure Constraints     2063

              of Italian verbs whose consonant pattern conforms to OCP-Place is significantly
              higher than that of the Italian verbs that violate OCP-Place (but these latter
              verbs may also be borrowed, and adapted to Maltese). This again supports the
              psychological reality of such a constraint, without it being categorical.
                These findings suggest that OCP-Place is a gradient constraint that aims at
              avoidance of similarity: the more similar adjacent consonants are, the more they
              are avoided. Speakers are able to make phonotactic generalizations about lexical
              morphemes, but the corresponding constraints need not be categorical.
                Statistical tendencies for the composition of various morphological categories
              such as the root and the stem have been observed by Wiese (2001): 94% of all
              German roots begin with a consonant, and 96% of all German roots end in a
              consonant. In OT, this can be expressed by alignment constraints that require
              the left and right edges of a root to coincide with the feature [+cons]. For those
              roots that violate the constraint, IO faithfulness will preserve the vowel at the
              edges. Note in particular that the tendency to have consonants at the end of roots
              does not follow from a syllable constraint, since the universally most unmarked
              syllable is the open syllable. Thus, this type of distribution may function as a
              boundary signal.


              5.2    Constraints on underlying forms
              Dutch exhibits intriguing constraints on sequences of vowels followed by frica-
              tives. The basic generalization is that a vowel is short before /f s/, whereas it is
              long before /v z/. Let us call this the VZ constraint. Due to the effect of Final
              Devoicing, the constraint that obstruents are voiceless at the end of a syllable, this
              constraint can only be observed directly if the fricative is not morpheme-final. The
              following morphemes illustrate this constraint:

              (11)   short vowel                  long vowel                    excluded
                     effen     /efHn/ ‘even’      even     /e(vHn/    ‘even’    /evHn, e(fHn/
                     dissel    /d/sHl/ ‘pole’     vezel    /ve(zHl/   ‘fiber’   /ezHl, e(sHl/

              This constraint is violated by a few loanwords like mazzel /mAzHl/ ‘good luck’ and
              puzzel /pœzHl/ ‘puzzle’, and by the native morpheme oefen- /u(fHn/ ‘to exercise’.
              This shows that this constraint is not an absolute condition on pronounceability,
              but a statistical generalization about morphemes.
                 This VZ constraint seems to apply to intervocalic sequences only, since we do
              find long vowels followed by /f s/ at the end of morphemes, as in the singular
              forms of the following nouns:

              (12)   graaf    [:ra(f] ‘earl (sg)’         grav-en   [:ra(vHn] (pl)
                     kaas     [ka(s] ‘cheese (sg)’        kaz-en    [ka(zHn] (pl)

              However, we can interpret this constraint as also applying to morpheme-final
              sequences if we assume the constraint to hold for the underlying forms of mor-
              phemes. Morphemes like graaf and kaas end in a voiced fricative underlyingly, as
              shown by their plural forms, and hence the underlying forms of these morphemes
              are /:ra(v/ and /ka(z/, respectively. There are a few exceptions, such as the
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10    15:56   Page 2064




              2064     Geert Booij

              non-native word graaf ‘graph’ with the plural form graf-en [:ra(fHn]. In the case
              of /s/ vs. /z/, the number of exceptions is much higher, since there are a number
              of verbs like eis-en [eisHn] ‘require (inf)’ and ruis-en [rœysHn] ‘rustle (inf)’, in which
              the diphthong, which counts as a long vowel, is followed by [s]. Speakers of
              Dutch may thus recognize a plural form as grafen as being non-native, whereas
              the phonetic form of its singular form graaf [:ra(f] does not betray this stratal
              property.
                 If we allow for phonotactic constraints on underlying forms that cannot be
              observed from their corresponding surface forms, this enables us to make gen-
              eralizations about the kind of alternations we may find in a language (Booij 1999).
              This topic is also broached in Ernestus and Baayen (2003). They raise the question
              to what extent the occurrence of alternations between morpheme-final voiceless
              and morpheme-final voiced obstruents in Dutch morphemes is predictable. There
              appear to be clear regularities. For instance, if a Dutch morpheme ends in a long
              vowel plus a labial stop, that stop is always an underlying /p/; that is, we do
              not find the alternation [p – b] for such morphemes. In the case of the frica-
              tives discussed above, we saw that the length of the preceding vowel is a strong
              predictor of whether the final obstruent is underlyingly voiced or voiceless,
              although stronger for /f v/ than for /s z/. The question is whether language users
              possess this kind of knowledge. Ernestus and Baayen (2003) tested this by asking
              subjects to make past tense forms for nonsense words. If the underlying form of
              the verbal root morpheme ends in a voiceless obstruent, the past tense suffix -te
              /tH/ will be chosen, and -de /dH/ otherwise. It appeared that language users do
              make use of the phonotactic tendencies involved: there is a strong correlation
              between the proportion of -te/-de choices for nonsense morphemes and the pro-
              portion for existing morphemes with a similar phonotactic make-up. Ernestus
              and Baayen (2003) therefore concluded that the speaker chooses an underlying
              representation for a nonsense morpheme that makes it resemble similar mor-
              phemes in the lexicon. As was the case for the Arabic roots discussed in §5.1,
              such phonotactic generalizations concerning morphemes may be statistical rather
              than absolute in nature. Moreover, they may pertain to underlying forms, where
              properties are present that may not be accessible in surface form.
                 This kind of knowledge about the type of alternations that occur in a language
              may also be formalized without restricting such MSCs to underlying forms.
              Consider the singular/plural pairs of nouns in Dutch with a stem-final obstruent
              such as hoed [hut] – hoed-en [hudHn] ‘hat (sg, pl)’. The voice specification of the
              stem-final obstruent of the morpheme hoed can only be determined on the basis
              of the plural form. The plural form is the most informative form of the paradigm
              (Albright 2005, 2008), and we may assume that it is stored in lexical memory. The
              relation between the two forms can be specified by a schema of the following type:

              (13)   [x]sg ↔ [x – Hn]pl

              (The symbol ↔ indicates the correlation between the two forms; x is a variable
              for a string of segments.) The plural form is the only reliable form for the
              computation of the underlying form, that is, the form on the basis of which new
              derived words and inflected forms can be computed. For instance, if we were to
              coin the adjective hoed-ig [hudHx] ‘hat-like’, the stem has to end in a /d/, since
              the phonetic form [hutHx] is wrong. That is, an underlying form is not necessarily
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10     15:56      Page 2065




                                                               Morpheme Structure Constraints      2065

              a lexically stored representation, but may be computed when necessary for a
              morphological operation. In the case of Dutch verbs, we need to compute the
              underlying form of the verbal stem for the choice of the proper form of the past
              tense suffix (-te or -de).
                Recall now the generalization for Dutch verbal stems that after a long vowel
              (VV) there is never a p/ b alternation: if a singular form ends in [VVp], its plural
              form will never end in [VVbHn]. This generalization also holds for nouns, and
              this can be expressed by the following subschema of (13) (y is a variable for
              segmental strings):

              (14)    [y VVp]sg ↔ [y VVp-Hn]pl

              In the case of the Dutch s/z alternations discussed above, we might assume
              subschemas like the following for nouns:

              (15)    a.   [y VVs]sg    ↔    [y VVz-Hn]pl     (as in kaas – kazen ‘cheese (sg, pl)’)
                      b.   [y Vs]sg     ↔    [y Vs-Hn]pl      (as in kas – kassen ‘greenhouse (sg, pl)’)

              If such schemas do not apply to all words, that is, if they are statistical general-
              izations only, they can be given a weight that indicates their probability.
                 The generalizations expressed in (15) apply almost exceptionlessly to nouns,
              and are confirmed by irregular pairs of singular and plural nouns with vowel
              length alternation. Vowel Lengthening is no longer a regular rule of Dutch,
              but an idiosyncratic alternation, a relic of Prokosch’s Law that applied to Early
              Germanic, illustrated here for the noun glas:

              (16)    glas [:lAs] ‘glass (sg)’     glaz-en [:la(zHn] ‘glass (pl)’

              The correspondence between the length of the vowel and the [voice] specification
              given in (15) is maintained in these irregular pairs by the combination of vowel
              length alternation and choice of obstruent: the forms *[:lAzHn] and *[:la(sHn] are
              both ill-formed.
                 In sum: whether there is an alternation between a voiced and a voiceless
              stem-final obstruent for Dutch lexical morphemes can only be determined with
              100 percent certainty on the basis of inflected forms such as plurals. Yet, segmental
              composition of the lexical morpheme may give a clue, in some cases with almost
              100 percent reliability. This type of knowledge may be modeled by constraints
              on the underlying forms of lexical morphemes, or by alternation schemas of the
              type proposed in (14) and (15).


              6      The expressive value of phonotactics
              A final phenomenon to be discussed is that particular sound sequences may
              have a specific semantic or pragmatic value. Sound symbolism is the usual term
              for such phenomena (see Hinton et al. 1994 for a number of detailed studies). In
              particular, there are phonaesthemes, recurring sounds or sound sequences, with
              a particular value. For instance, Marchand (1969: 397) argued that “/i/ is sugges-
              tive of the subjective, emotionally small and is therefore frequent with diminutive
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10     15:56   Page 2066




              2066      Geert Booij

              and pet suffixes,” and Bauer (1996) also found a cross-linguistic tendency for
              the use of this vowel in diminutive suffixes (see also Nichols 1971 for consonant
              sound symbolism in diminutives). According to Marchand (1969), the word-initial
              sequence fl- in words like flick, flip, flap, flash is expressive of brisk, quick move-
              ment, and Marchand provides many examples of such phonaesthemes. Such sound
              combinations are not to be considered as morphemes by themselves; yet they have
              a particular value. Hence, one may claim that phonotactic properties of morphemes
              can have an expressive role.
                Japanese has a class of mimetic morphemes, which are sound-imitating or
              manner-symbolic roots. These morphemes have to be minimally bimoraic, and
              usually they appear in reduplicated or some other bipodic form (Mester and Itô
              1989: 268):

              (17) poko-poko       ‘up and down movement’
                   noro-noro       ‘slow movement’
                   paku-paku       ‘munching’
                   pata-pata       ‘palpitating’

              In her study of the expressive value of lexical patterns, Klamer (2002) observed
              that the violation of general phonotactic constraints in specific classes of lexical
              items may have an expressive value. That is, a marked semantic value correlates
              with a marked phonotactic structure. An example from Dutch is the class of mono-
              syllabic words of the type /lVl/, that is, words with the same consonant /l/ in
              onset and coda. Such words violate the phonotactic constraint or tendency of
              Dutch that the liquid consonants /l r/ in a syllable should be different. Words
              with this kind of phonotactics may have marked interpretations, as the following
              examples from Klamer (2002: 273) illustrate:

              (18)    lal (v)   ‘jabber, babble, slur one’s words’
                      lel (n)   ‘earlobe, clout, whopper’
                      lil (v)   ‘quiver’
                      lol (n)   ‘fun, lark, trick’
                      lul (n)   ‘prick, jerk’
                      lul (v)   ‘talk nonsense’

              Morphemes in which the vowel of /lVl/ is long do not occur at all.
                In sum, the expressive value of phonotactic patterns within morphemes may
              be considered from a different angle: the violation of a constraint may have
              expressive value.


              7      Conclusions
              There is no doubt that there are distributional generalizations concerning the phono-
              logical make-up of morphemes that need to be expressed somehow in a proper
              phonological theory. The main theoretical issues are to what extent they can be
              made to follow from phonological generalizations that also hold for larger units
              than morphemes, and whether they are absolute constraints, or gradient constraints
              that express statistical tendencies. MSCs may also reveal different layers of the
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10     15:56     Page 2067




                                                                 Morpheme Structure Constraints             2067

              lexicon. Thus this chapter provides a range of data, observations, and con-
              siderations that can be used as a testing ground for the adequacy of theoretical
              phonological models.


              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
              I would like to thank Paulo Chagas de Souza, Moira Yip, two anonymous reviewers, and
              the editors for their constructive comments and advice on an earlier draft of this chapter.
              In writing the final version, I also profited from taking part in a phonology seminar on
              phonotactic learning taught by Adam Albright at MIT and Harvard in the Spring semester
              of 2010.



              REFERENCES
              Albright, Adam. 2005. The morphological basis of paradigm leveling. In Downing et al.
                    (2005), 17 – 43. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
              Albright, Adam. 2008. Inflectional paradigms have bases too. Evidence from Yiddish. In
                    Asaf Bachrach & Andrew Nevins (eds.) Inflectional identity, 271–312. Oxford: Oxford
                    University Press.
              Alderete, John. 2003. Structural disparities in Navajo word domains: A case for LexCat-
                    Faithfulness. The Linguistic Review 20. 111–157.
              Anderson, Stephen R. 1974. The organization of phonology. New York: Academic Press.
              Bar-Lev, Zev. 1978. The Hebrew morphemes. Lingua 45. 319–331.
              Bauer, Laurie. 1996. No phonetic iconicity in evaluative morphology. Studia Linguistica 50.
                    189 – 206.
              Bell, Alan. 1976. The distributional syllable. In Alphonse Juilland (ed.) Linguistic studies offered
                    to Joseph Greenberg, vol. 2, 249 –262. Saratoga, CA: Anma Libri.
              Berent, Iris, Gary F. Marcus, Joseph Shimron & Adamantios I. Gafos. 2002. The scope
                    of linguistic generalizations: Evidence from Hebrew word formation. Cognition 83.
                    113 –139.
              Booij, Geert. 1983. Principles and parameters in prosodic phonology. Linguistics 21.
                    249 – 280.
              Booij, Geert. 1995. The phonology of Dutch. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
              Booij, Geert. 1999. Morpheme structure constraints and the phonotactics of Dutch. In
                    Harry van der Hulst & Nancy Ritter (eds.) The syllable: Views and facts, 53–68. Berlin
                    & New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
              Booij, Geert. 2000. The phonology–morphology interface. In Lisa Cheng & Rint Sybesma
                    (eds.) The first Glot International state-of-the-art book: The latest in linguistics, 287–306.
                    Berlin & New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
              Chomsky, Noam & Morris Halle. 1968. The sound pattern of English. New York: Harper &
                    Row.
              Clayton, Mary. 1976. The redundancy of underlying morpheme structure conditions.
                    Language 52. 295 – 313.
              Davis, Stuart. 1991. Coronals and the phonotactics of nonadjacent consonants in English.
                    In Paradis & Prunet (1991), 49 –60.
              Don, Jan & Marian Erkelens. 2006. Vorm en categorie. Taal en Tongval 19. 40–53.
              Downing, Laura J. 2006. Canonical forms in prosodic morphology. Oxford: Oxford University
                    Press.
              Downing, Laura J., T. A. Hall & Renate Raffelsiefen (eds.) 2005. Paradigms in phonological
                    theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
TBC_086.qxd   12/17/10     15:56    Page 2068




              2068      Geert Booij

              Dressler, Wolfgang U. 1985. Morphonology: The dynamics of derivation. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma.
              Ernestus, Mirjam & R. Harald Baayen. 2003. Predicting the unpredictable: Interpreting
                    neutralized segments in Dutch. Language 79. 5–38.
              Frisch, Stefan A., Janet B. Pierrehumbert & Michael B. Broe. 2004. Similarity avoidance and
                    the OCP. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 22. 179–228.
              Frisch, Stefan A. & Bushra A. Zawaydeh. 2001. The psychological reality of OCP Place in
                    Arabic. Language 77. 91–106.
              Greenberg, Joseph H. 1950. The patterning of root morphemes in Semitic. Word 6. 162–181.
              Halle, Morris. 1959. The sound pattern of Russian: A linguistic and acoustical investigation. The
                    Hague: Mouton.
              Halle, Morris. 1964. On the basis of phonology. In Jerry A. Fodor & Jerrold J. Katz (eds.)
                    The structure of language: Readings in the philosophy of language, 324–333. Englewood
                    Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
              Harris, John. 1994. English sound structure. Oxford: Blackwell.
              Harvey, Mark & Brett Baker. 2005. Vowel harmony, directionality and morpheme struc-
                    ture constraints in Warlpiri. Lingua 115. 1457–1474.
              Hinton, Leanne, Johanna Nicols & John J. Ohala (eds.) 1994. Sound symbolism. Cambridge:
                    Cambridge University Press.
              Hooper, Joan B. 1972. The syllable in phonological theory. Language 48. 525–540.
              Itô, Junko & Armin Mester. 1995. Japanese phonology. In John A. Goldsmith (ed.) The
                    handbook of phonological theory, 817–838. Cambridge, MA & Oxford: Blackwell.
              Itô, Junko & Armin Mester. 1999. The phonological lexicon. In Natsuko Tsujimura (ed.)
                    The handbook of Japanese linguistics, 62–100. Malden, MA & Oxford: Blackwell.
              Itô, Junko & Armin Mester. 2001. Covert generalizations in Optimality Theory: The role
                    of stratal faithfulness constraints. Studies in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology 7.
                    273 – 299.
              Jakobson, Roman. 1949. L’aspect phonologique et l’aspect grammatical du langage dans
                    leurs interrelations. Reprinted 1963 in Roman Jakobson. Essais de linguistique générale,
                    161–175. Paris: Minuit.
              Kager, René. 1999. Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
              Kaisse, Ellen M. & Patricia A. Shaw. 1985. On the theory of Lexical Phonology. Phonology
                    Yearbook 2. 1– 30.
              Kenstowicz, Michael & Charles W. Kisseberth. 1977. Topics in phonological theory. New York:
                    Academic Press.
              Kiparsky, Paul. 1982. From Cyclic Phonology to Lexical Phonology. In Harry van der Hulst
                    & Norval Smith (eds.) The structure of phonological representations, part I, 131–175.
                    Dordrecht: Foris.
              Klamer, Marian. 2002. Semantically motivated lexical patterns: A study of Dutch and Kambera
                    expressives. Language 78. 258 –286.
              Kristoffersen, Gjert. 2000. The phonology of Norwegian. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
              Marchand, Hans. 1969. The categories and types of present-day English word formation.
                    Munich: Beck.
              McCarthy, John J. 1986. OCP effects: Gemination and antigemination. Linguistic Inquiry 17.
                    207 – 263.
              McCarthy, John J. 1998. Morpheme structure constraints and paradigm occultation. Papers
                    from the Annual Regional Meeting, Chicago Linguistic Society 32(2). 123–150.
              McCarthy, John J. 2002. A thematic guide to Optimality Theory. Oxford: Oxford University
                    Press.
              McCarthy, John J. 2005. Optimal paradigms. In Downing et al. (2005), 170–210.
              McCarthy, John J. & Alan Prince. 1993. Generalized alignment. Yearbook of Morphology 1993.
                    79 –153.
              Mester, Armin & Junko Itô. 1989. Feature predictability and underspecification: Palatal
                    prosody in Japanese mimetics. Language 65. 258–293.
TBC_086.qxd    12/17/10     15:56    Page 2069




                                                               Morpheme Structure Constraints           2069

              Nespor, Marina & Irene Vogel. 1986. Prosodic phonology. Dordrecht: Foris.
              Nichols, Johanna. 1971. Diminutive consonant symbolism in western North America.
                   Language 47. 826 – 848.
              Oostendorp, Marc van. 1995. Vowel quality and phonological projection. Ph.D. disserta-
                   tion, University of Tilburg.
              Paradis, Carole & Jean-François Prunet (eds.) 1991. The special status of coronals: Internal and
                   external evidence. San Diego: Academic Press.
              Postal, Paul. 1968. Aspects of phonological theory. New York: Harper & Row.
              Rice, Keren. 2009. Athapaskan: Slave. In Rochelle Lieber & Pavol Stekauer (eds.) The Oxford
                   handbook of compounding, 542 – 573. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
              Rubach, Jerzy & Geert Booij. 1990. Edge of constituent effects in Polish. Natural Language
                   and Linguistic Theory 8. 427 – 463.
              Shibatani, Masayoshi. 1973. The role of surface phonetic constraints in generative phono-
                   logy. Language 49. 87 –106.
              Sommerstein, Alan H. 1974. On phonotactically motivated rules. Journal of Linguistics 10.
                   71– 94.
              Stanley, Richard S. 1967. Redundancy rules in phonology. Language 43. 393–436.
              Vago, Robert M. 1976. Theoretical implications of Hungarian vowel harmony. Linguistic
                   Inquiry 7. 243 – 263.
              Wiese, Richard. 2001. The structure of the Germanic vocabulary: Edge marking of cat-
                   egories and functional considerations. Linguistics 39. 95–115.
              Wijk, Nicolaas van. 1939. Fonologie: Een hoofdstuk uit de structurele taalwetenschap. The
                   Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
              Yip, Moira. 1991. Coronals, consonant clusters, and the coda condition. In Paradis & Prunet
                   (1991), 61– 78.
              Zimmer, Karl. 1969. Psychological correlates of some Turkish morpheme structure con-
                   ditions. Language 45. 309 – 321.
              Zonneveld, Wim. 1983. Lexical and phonological properties of Dutch voicing assimilation.
                   In Marcel van den Broecke, Vincent van Heuven & Wim Zonneveld (eds.) Sound
                   structures: Studies for Antonie Cohen, 297–312. Dordrecht: Foris.
