                           Slightly revised version to appear in Phonology.




                                    Phonotactics as phonology:
                         Knowledge of a complex restriction in Dutch
     René Kager (Utrecht University) and Joe Pater (University of Massachusetts Amherst)


Abstract: The Dutch lexicon contains very few sequences of a long vowel followed by a
consonant cluster, where the second member of the cluster is a non-coronal. We provide
experimental evidence that Dutch speakers have implicit knowledge of this gap, which cannot be
reduced to the probability of segmental sequences or to word-likeness as measured by
neighborhood density. The experiment also suggests that the ill-formedness of this sequence is
mediated by syllable structure: it has a weaker effect on judgments when the last consonant
begins a new syllable. We provide an account in terms of Hayes and Wilson’s Maximum
Entropy model of phonotactics, using constraints that go beyond the complexity permitted by
their model of constraint induction.


1. Introduction
1.1 General background
Phonological analysis and theorizing typically takes phonotactics as part of the data to be
accounted for in terms of a phonological grammar. For example, Chomsky and Halle (1968: 382)
aim to provide an account of voice assimilation in Russian as it is instantiated in morpheme
alternations and also of the corresponding static phonotactic restriction: the absence of
morpheme-internal sequences of obstruents that disagree in voicing (see Pater and Tessier 2006
for experimental support for a unified account of alternations and phonotactics). Ohala (1986)
challenges the assumption that phonotactics require a phonological account, raising the
possibility that knowledge of the shape of a language’s words could be reduced to “knowledge of
the lexicon plus the possession of very general cognitive abilities”. As an example of the
requisite general cognitive abilities, he points to Greenberg and Jenkins’ (1964) phoneme
substitution metric, which measures the closeness of a nonce word to the existing lexicon as
proportional to the number of times that the replacement of each subset of the nonce word’s
segments yields an existing word.
       Like many other models of word-likeness or probability, Greenberg and Jenkins’ model
of phonotactic knowledge is quite different from those constructed in phonological theory. The
first difference is in the nature of the representations employed: Greenberg and Jenkins make use
only of segments, while a phonological analysis of a language’s phonotactics typically refers to
segment-internal features as well as prosodic constituents such as syllables. While Greenberg
and Jenkins and Ohala recognize the absence of features from the model as a potential flaw,
purely segmental models of phonotactics continue to be common in psycholinguistics and natural
language procesing. The second difference is in the nature of the computation used to evaluate a
representation. As Ohala (1986) points out, the Greenberg and Jenkins model assumes no
“abstracted (‘derivative’) knowledge about language-specific or language-universal sound
patterns”, that is, it makes no use of phonological constraints or rules. The third and final
difference is in the nature of the classification of a representation that the model returns: the
Greenberg and Jenkins model yields a range of scores for representations that would typically be
classified as only either “well-formed” or “ill-formed” in a phonological analysis (this two-way
classification is commonly assumed in phonological theory – see e.g. Hayes 2004, Prince and
Tesar 2004, though cf. Chomsky and Halle 1968:417 and others cited just below). Ohala (1986)
points to experimental data gathered by Ohala and Ohala (1986) that shows that nonce word
judgments are gradient in the way that the Greenberg and Jenkins model predicts.
       Phonologists have only recently responded to Ohala’s (1986) challenge. The first type of
response has involved the creation of models of phonotactics that provide gradient evaluation of
well-formedness, but that exploit the representational vocabulary of phonological theory (e.g.
Coleman and Pierrehumbert 1997, Bailey and Hahn 2001, Frisch, Pierrehumbert and Broe 2004,
Coetzee and Pater 2006, 2008, Anttila 2008, Coetzee 2008, Hayes and Wilson 2008, Albright
2009). The second type of response has been to provide experimental evidence that phonotactic
knowledge is encoded in terms of the constructs of phonological theory, and cannot be attributed
solely to measures of word-likeness or probability calculated over segmental strings (e.g. Berent,
Everett and Shimron 2001, Frisch and Zawaydeh 2001, Coetzee 2008, Albright 2009).
       The present paper contributes a novel type of evidence in support of a phonological
account of phonotactics. We show using a nonce word judgement task that Dutch speakers have
knowledge of a phonotactic restriction against a sequence of a long vowel followed by a pair of
consonants, the second of which is non-coronal (e.g. *[me!lk]). The argument that this
knowledge cannot be reduced to segmental sequence probability or to word-likeness is three-
fold. First, the experimental items were controlled for measures of both sequence probability and


                                                2
word-likeness. Second, as we discuss in the following section, the complexity of this restriction
goes beyond the representational capacity of many models of sequence probability. And finally,
our experiments indicate that the strength of this restriction is relative to syllable structure. When
the trisegmental sequence at issue is contained within a syllable, as in *[me!lk], its effect on
judgments is stronger than when it straddles a syllable boundary, as in *[me!l.k"l]. This
asymmetry is not present the Dutch lexicon, in which the sequence is rare in both contexts (as we
show in detail in section 2). It seems that in acquiring the phonotactics of Dutch, learners “over-
phonologize” them, imposing (or enhancing) a phonological structure.
       The Dutch data presented below speak not only to the question of whether phonotactics
deserve a phonological treatment, but also to the form of the phonotactic grammar. In the next
section, we briefly introduce probabilistic models of phonotactics, focusing on how the Dutch
phonotactic restriction investigated here may pose challenges for them. We return to further
discussion of Hayes and Wilson’s (2008) Maximum Entropy model of phonotactics in section 4,
where we present our account of our findings within that framework.


1.2 Probabilistic phonotactics and the Dutch restriction
The complexity of the Dutch phonotactic restriction that we are investigating poses a challenge
to both what can be taken as a baseline probabilistic model of phonotactics, as well as to some
versions of the more elaborate Maximum Entropy model proposed by Hayes and Wilson (2008).
      A probabilistic model of phonotactics assigns to every word some probability over the
space of possible words. The simplest probabilistic model of phonotactics is an n-gram model.
An n-gram model of phonotactics is based on the frequency of each segmental string of length n
in the words of a language. These frequencies yield a probability for each of the strings (the
frequency of a string divided by the summed frequencies of all strings of length n). The
probability of any string longer than n can then be calculated as the product of the probabilities
of the substrings of length n. For example, a unigram model would calculate the probability of
[paka] as p([p]) # p([a]) # p([k]) # p([a]). A bigram model would calculate the probability of
[#paka#] as p([#p]) # p([pa]) # p([ak]) # p([ka]) # p([a#]).
       While appealingly simple, and broadly used in psycholinguistic research and natural
language processing (see Jurafsky and Martin 2000), n-gram models are limited in terms of the
types of pattern they can capture. One limit derives from the sparseness of attested strings over


                                                  3
the space of possible strings when n gets larger than 2, making even trigrams typically unuseable
as models of phonotactics (see Pierrehumbert 2003: 214 ff. for related discussion). A second
limit derives from the inability of n-gram models to cross-classify strings, to express the non-
independent restrictions imposed by constraints on various aspects of phonological
representation (Hayes and Wilson 2008, Martin to appear).
        The Dutch restriction against long vowels followed by a consonant cluster ending in a
non-coronal (e.g. *[me!lk]) cannot be expressed in terms of bigrams, since both the sequence of a
long vowel followed by a consonant (e.g. [me!l] ‘flour’), as well as the consonant cluster ending
in a non-coronal (e.g. [m!lk] ‘milk’), are well-attested. Section 2 documents these claims based
on corpus statistics.
        Pierrehumbert (2003: 218) raises the issue of whether triphone constraints are
internalized by native speakers: “Possibly, people may have some implicit knowledge of these
facts, but it would be difficult to demonstrate that any such knowledge goes beyond lexical
neighborhood effects”. Section 3 presents experimental results that show that Dutch speakers
have indeed internalized the *V!CC[-cor] restriction. As documented by their comparative well-
formedness judgments, subjects show a stronger dispreference for long vowels followed by a
cluster than for long vowels followed by just a singleton consonant. The experimental items were
controlled for bigram and trigram frequency, as well as for measures of lexical similarity,
including the lexical neighborhood density measure mentioned by Pierrehumbert (which
somewhat resembles the Greenberg and Jenkins model discussed above). These controls appear
to rule out any model of phonotactics based purely on raw segment frequency as an account for
these results.
        To overcome the limits of simple probabilistic models of phonotactics like n-gram
models, Hayes and Wilson (2008) propose a Maximum Entropy model, which calculates the
probability of a word based on the weights of a set of phonological constraints (see Hayes and
Wilson 2008, as well as section 4 below on the details of this calculation). There is no limit to
complexity of the constraints that can be employed in a Maximum Entropy model, nor is there a
requirement that they be independent. This probabilistic model of phonotactics can in principle
accommodate any constraint that has been proposed in phonological theory (that is, so long as
the constraint assigns to each representation a numerical score, such as the number of violations).
        Hayes and Wilson (2008) also propose a method for learning the constraints, and this

                                                4
method does impose limits on constraint complexity. Hayes and Wilson’s constraints are
restrictions against sequences of segment types (classified in terms of natural classes), with an
upper limit of three elements in the sequence. To express dependencies between non-adjacent
segments, as needed to capture vowel harmony and stress placement regularities, Hayes and
Wilson make use of projections, similar to those used in autosegmental theory. However, Hayes
and Wilson’s learner does not acquire constraints that refer to syllable structure or any other
prosodic structure.
       Violations of *V!CC[-cor] can occur both tautosyllabically, and across a syllable boundary
(e.g. *[me!lk"l]). At issue is whether violations in these contexts are judged equally serious by
human subjects. Our corpus study supports Kager’s (1989) observation that this sequence is also
highly underrepresented heterosyllabically, and gives little evidence for the constraint's
sensitivity to syllable structure. Nevertheless, our experimental results show that syllable
structure affects well-formedness judgments; *V!CC[-cor] has a stronger effect when the string is
contained in a single syllable.
       We take these results to support the view that phonotactics do require a phonological
account, since no explicit model of “knowledge of the lexicon plus...general cognitive abilities”
that we know of can account for them. They also support the view that phonotactic knowledge is
not categorical, since the *V!CC[-cor] constraint does have exceptions, yet speakers still show
evidence of having internalized the pattern, and they also distinguish between grades of ill-
formedness. In section 4, we provide an account of our results in terms of Hayes and Wilson’s
Maximum Entropy model of phonotactic grammar, using a constraint set that goes beyond the
one that would be induced by their learner. In particular, the constraint set must distinguish
between violations of *V!CC[-cor] that occur word-finally and those that occur word-internally. In
terms of purely linear constraints, this would exceed the three-element maximum imposed by
Hayes and Wilson. In our account, the distinction is achieved by allowing constraints to be
indexed to syllabic context; we choose this over including even larger segmental constraints
because we suspect that it will be more useful in generalizing to other phenomena. We do not,
however, provide an alternative model of constraint induction that would generate these
constraints. The case of *V!CC[-cor] thus continues to stand as a challenge for models of the
learning of phonotactics.



                                                5
2. Corpus data
Dutch vowels fall into several classes based on distributional criteria (de Groot 1931, Moulton
1962, Cohen, Ebeling, Fokkema and van Holk 1959, Nooteboom 1972, Booij 1995,
Gussenhoven 2009). We focus on monophthongs that can occur in stressed syllables (hence, we
ignore schwa, diphthongs, and a class of long vowels that occurs in loanwords only). These
vowels form two classes that have been traditionally referred to as Class A and Class B (Moulton
1962).


(1)      a.    Class A                   b.    Class B
               $       %                       i        y      u
               &       '                       e!       ø!     o!
                       (                                       a!


These classes are based mainly on two distributional criteria (Moulton 1962, Trommelen 1983,
Van der Hulst 1984, Kager 1989, Booij 1995, van Oostendorp 2000). First, Class A vowels never
occur in word-final position nor before another vowel (these vowels are ‘checked’), whereas
Class B vowels freely occur in these positions (these vowels are ‘free’). Second, Class A vowels
freely occur before consonant clusters whose second member is either labial or velar (i.e., a non-
coronal), whereas Class B vowels do not, with few exceptions (e.g. [twa!lf] ‘twelve’). This
distributional restriction on Class B vowels, which is the focus of our study, is illustrated in (2).


(2)      a.    V!C                       b.    VCC[-cor]                c.     *V!CC[-cor]
               paal    pa!l    ‘pole’          palm     p!lm ‘palm’            paalm *pa!lm

               stoom sto!m ‘steam’             stomp st"mp ‘dull’              stoomp *sto!mp

               haar    ha!r    ‘hair’          harp     h!rp   ‘harp’          haarp *ha!rp

               meel    me!l    ‘flour’         melk     m!lk   ‘milk’          meelk *me!lk


We will follow the phonological tradition of referring to Class A vowels as ‘short’ and Class B
vowels as ‘long’. Most proposals about Dutch syllable structure have interpreted the phonotactic
restriction illustrated in (2c) in terms of an abstract length property (Trommelen 1983, van der

                                                    6
Hulst 1984, Kager and Zonneveld 1986, Kager 1989). In such proposals, the explanation of this
phonotactic restriction is that the maximum rime template in word-final position for Dutch has
three positions, two of which are occupied by a Class B vowel, leaving only space for a single
consonant, plus an extraprosodic word appendix. Alternatively, the rime template can be filled
by a Class A vowel (one position) plus two consonants. Since the appendix is restricted to
containing coronal obstruents, this explains the relaxation of the pre-cluster restriction for final
coronals (e.g. [ta!rt] ‘cake’).
        Phonetically it is more accurate to interpret Class A and B vowels as ‘lax’ and ‘tense’,
respectively (Cohen, Ebeling, Fokkema and van Holk 1959; cf. Rietveld and van Heuven’s use
of ATR). When unstressed, Class B vowels are phonetically short (with approximately the same
duration as Class A vowels; Nooteboom 1972, Rietveld, Kerkhoff and Gussenhoven 2004).
Additional phonetic evidence against a length-based analysis is that the high Class B vowels [i,
u, y] are phonetically short even when stressed (e.g. mie [mi] ‘Chinese noodles’, moe [mu]
‘tired’, cru [kry] ‘crude’; riet [rit] ‘reed’, zoet [zut] ‘sweet’, fuut [fyt] ‘grebe’; Nooteboom 1972,
Rietveld, Kerkhoff and Gussenhoven 2004), except being phonetically long before
tautomorphemic and tautosyllabic singleton [r] (e.g. [bi!r] ‘beer’, [bu!r] ‘farmer’, [by!r]
‘neighbor’; Gussenhoven 1993). Nevertheless, high tense vowels [i, u, y] participate in both of
the phonotactic restrictions for Class B vowels, offering only a handful of exceptions to the pre-
cluster restriction (e.g. hielp [hilp] ‘helped’, stierf [stirf] ‘deceased’, wierp [)irp] ‘threw’;
Moulton 1962, Booij 1995). Distributionally, it is relevant that these exceptions all contain short
[i], even those where it occurs before tautomorphemic [r]. Identifying tenseness to be the core
contrastive property, van Oostendorp (2000) proposes to specify Class B vowels as underlyingly
tense and to derive the surface length of non-high tense vowels by open syllable lengthening.1
Gussenhoven (2009) argues, on the basis of surface length pairs (e.g. short [i] in wierpen [)irp"n]
‘threw+plural’ versus long [i] in Kierkegaard [ki!rk"ga!rt] idem), that length should nevertheless
be represented in the phonology (cannot be due to phonetic implementation), although tenseness
may suffice for lexical representations.


1
  Open syllable lengthening targets CV sequences in word-final and pre-vocalic position, as well as
crucially word-final CVC (e.g. [pa:l] ‘pole’), whose final consonant is extrasyllabic. In order to predict
lengthening in CVCC[+cor] (e.g. [ta:rt] ‘cake’) but not in CVCC[-cor] (e.g. *[pa:lm]), van Oostendorp
assumes extraprosodicity of final coronals in addition to extrasyllabicity. Crucially, these devices are
additive in CVCC[-cor].

                                                    7
        Clearly, the issue of whether length, tenseness, or both, are the phonologically active
features is a complex one, and we do not aim to resolve it here. Our own phonological account in
section 4 is compatible with either view; all that is crucial is that there be some feature that
separates the vowels into two classes. In our corpus study and our experiment, we include the
high tense vowels that are phonetically short as instances of Class B/‘long’ vowels. If Dutch
speakers do not in fact classify these vowels as belonging to this class, this would only weaken
the difference between the two types of stimuli, rather than introduce a confound.
        The following are the statistics (type counts) from a dictionary of 8,305 monomorphemic
stems derived from the CELEX Dutch Phonological Lemmas database (Baayen, Piepenbrock
and Gulikers 1995). In all counts presented below, consonants in position C1 in VC1 and VC1C2
were limited to liquids [l, r] and nasals [m, n, *], and consonants in C2 of VC1C2 to obstruents [p,
b, f, v, k, +, x, ,, t, d, s, z] and nasals. This is a subset of the full set of clusters, with limits that
are the same as we imposed on our experimental stimuli; this reflects an assumption that the
subjects in our experiment may calculate the relevant probabilities over that part of the lexicon
that has phonological properties similar to those of the test items (see further footnote 9). This
choice does not affect our conclusions.2 Long/tense vowels included [a, e, o, ø, i, u, y] and
short/lax vowels [(, !, $, ', %]. The CELEX database was searched for word-final strings without
limitation to syllable number. For example, the search for the word-final sequence VCC[-cor]
returned monosyllables such as bonk as well as disyllables such as spelonk.
        We start with word-final position, where consonant clusters are tautosyllabic, as in the
above examples. The expected values (E) are calculated from the joint probability of the two
levels of a factor in this set of strings. For example, E=99 in the V!CC cell comes from the
overall probability of long vowels (0.39) times the overall probability of clusters (0.19) times the
total number of strings (1340). O/E is the observed number (O) divided by E. When O/E is lower
than 1, the observed value is lower than expected. Since there are only two long vowels in the
context of word-final clusters that end in non-coronals, O/E is quite low (O/E = 0.02). A chi-
square test measures the likelihood that the overall distribution arose from chance. The
distribution in Table 1 is highly unlikely to have arisen from chance (Chi-square = 191.87, df =
1, p < .001).
2
 For example, if we include all CC clusters in a contingency table like that in Table 1, we still only have
3 examples of V!CC[-cor] clusters, which leads to an O/E value of 0.03. The other O/E values also remain
essentially the same, as do those in other tables.

                                                    8
                    _C             _CC
        V           563            252
                (O/E = 0.85) (O/E = 1.63)
        V!          523              2
                (O/E = 1.23) (O/E = 0.02)

Table 1. Word-final position in monomorphemic Dutch stems, where C2 is [-cor].


The underrepresentation of V!CC[-cor] sequences is thus not merely the product of the probability
of long vowels in the _CC[-cor] context and the probability of postvocalic CC[-cor] sequences as
compared with C. We can further note that while long vowels are somewhat underrepresented in
all _CC contexts, the effect is far stronger with clusters that end in a non-coronal. That is, the
*V!CC[-cor] restriction is not just a general restriction against long vowels before clusters. This
can be seen in Table 2, where the coronal-final clusters receive an O/E score of 0.59.3 The
overall distribution is again highly unlikely to have arisen by chance (Chi-square = 240.38, df =
2, p < .001).


                    _C          _CC[+cor]         _CC[-cor]
        V           563            264              252
                (O/E = 0.80) (O/E = 1.22) (O/E = 1.53)
        V!          523             70                2
                (O/E = 1.36) (O/E = 0.59) (O/E = 0.02)

Table 2. Word-final position in monomorphemic Dutch stems


        We now turn to the distribution of clusters which occur in prevocalic position, and hence,
are heterosyllabic. This investigation is motivated by claims in the literature (Moulton 1962,
Kager 1989) that Class B vowels are restricted by a CC[-cor] cluster not only in word-final
position but also before a vowel, where clusters are heterosyllabic (e.g. [a!rd"] ‘earth’ versus

3
 It remains possible that the *V!CC[-cor] restriction is due to the joint effects of a constraint against long
vowels before clusters and a constraint against clusters that end in non-coronals. This seems unlikely,
given the large number of CC[-cor] clusters following short vowels (see Wilson and Obdeyn 2009 for a
Maximum Entropy method for addressing this and similar questions).

                                                      9
*[a!rb"]). Again, long vowels are highly underrepresented before non-coronal-final clusters.
Compared with word-final position, the coronal/non-coronal difference is slightly smaller (that
is, the degree of underrepresentation of long vowels before coronal-final clusters is higher in
Table 3 than Table 2). The overall distribution is again highly unlikely to have arisen by chance
(Chi-square = 1190, df = 2, p < .001).


                 _C          _CC[+cor]      _CC[-cor]
       V        408            485             492
            (O/E = 0.49) (O/E = 1.73) (O/E = 1.80)
       V!       1124            30             10
            (O/E = 1.61) (O/E = 0.13) (O/E = 0.04)

Table 3. Word-internal position in monomorphemic Dutch bisyllabic stems


       The bisyllabic words in our experiment are limited to monomorphemic stems ending in a
schwa-liquid cluster. Table 4 presents the figures for monomorphemic stems ending in a schwa-
liquid cluster in the Dutch lexicon, which form a subset of the cases in Table 3. The pattern is
largely the same, though long vowels are preferred in the _C context in table 3, while short
vowels are more common in this same context in table 4. The overall distribution is once more
highly unlikely to have arisen by chance (Chi-square = 23.48, df = 2, p < .001).


                 _C          _CC[+cor]      _CC[-cor]
       V         54             66             71
            (O/E = 0.86) (O/E = 1.07) (O/E = 1.07)
       V!        14              1              1
            (O/E = 2.66) (O/E = 0.19) (O/E = 0.18)

Table 4. Word-internal position in Dutch stems ending in VC(C)"L


       In sum, long vowels are strongly underrepresented before CC[-cor] clusters that are both
tautosyllabic with respect to the vowel (in word-final position) and that are heterosyllabic (in
prevocalic position). To test the statistical reliability of the *V!CC[-cor] restriction, and to

                                               10
investigate whether syllable structure affects its strength, we performed a logistic regression on
the lexical data presented above. We included only the cases with singleton consonants and CC[-
cor] clusters, since these correspond to our experimental stimuli. Words were coded for the binary

dependent variable of vowel length (long = 1, short = 0), and the binary explanatory variables of
following consonantal context (CC[-cor]           cluster = 1, singleton = 0) and syllabification
(tautosyllabic = 1, heterosyllabic = 0). We expect an effect of context based on the relatively low
frequency of long vowels in the CC[-cor] cluster context shown in the tables above. If this effect
is mediated by syllable structure, there should be an interaction between context and
syllabification.
        The first analysis includes the tautosyllabic data from table 2 and the bisyllabic data from
table 3 (that is, the broader set of bisyllables). The model was fitted using the GLM function in R
(R Development Core Team 2010), and the significance values of the factors and their
interaction shown in (3) are those that it returns.


(3)     Result of logistic regression with full set of bisyllables
                                       Coefficient Standard error P (>|z|)
                                        Estimate
       Intercept                          1.01          0.06      < 0.001
       Syllabification                    –1.09            0.08         < 0.001
       C-Context                          –4.91            0.32         < 0.001
       C-Context * Syllabification         0.15            0.78             0.851


The effects of both consonantal context (C-Context) and syllabification are statistically
significant, while the relatively small effect of the interaction is not.
        From the coefficient of the intercept, we can calculate the probability that the model
gives a long vowel when the explanatory variables have a value of zero, that is, when a singleton
consonant follows in a bisyllable (1 / (1 + exp–(1.01)) = 0.73). This expected probability
matches the frequency in the observed data (to several decimal places). The coefficients for each
of the main effects allows us to calculate the probability given to a long vowel when a CC[-cor]
cluster follows in a bisyllable (1 / (1 + exp–(1.01–4.91)) = 0.02, observed frequency = 0.06), and
when a singleton follows in a tautosyllabic context (1 / (1 + exp–(1.01–1.09)) = 0.48, observed
frequency = 0.48). The large main effect for context is what we expected based on the rarity of

                                                   11
long vowels in the CC[-cor] context. The effect for syllabification arises from the general
overrepresentation of long vowels in bisyllables relative to monosyllables.
       With the coefficients from both of the main effects and the interaction term we get the
predicted probability of a long vowel before a CC[-cor] cluster in a tautosyllabic context (1 / (1 +
exp–(1.01–1.09–4.91+0.15)) = 0.01, observed frequency = 0.01). The coefficient for the
interaction term indicates a small effect that goes in the opposite direction from what would be
predicted if the presence of CC[-cor] cluster had a greater influence in a tautosyllabic context than
in a heterosyllabic context on the probability of a long vowel. Since the effect is so small and so
far from statistically significant at the 0.05 level, this almost certainly indicates the absence of an
influence of syllable structure on the strength of the restriction, rather than an influence in the
unexpected direction.
       In sum, the model gives long vowels significantly lower probability before *V!CC[-cor]
clusters, and in tautosyllabic contexts than in heterosyllabic contexts, but these effects are
independent: the strength of the *V!CC[-cor] restriction is not significantly greater in tautosyllabic
contexts. We further confirmed this finding by fitting a model that does not include the
interaction term: there was no significant difference in predictive power between the models as
measured by a chi-square test (p = 0.854). With the interaction, the AIC score was 3409.3, and
without it was 3407.3. On this measure, which includes a penalty for model complexity, lower is
better, but a difference of 2 is not usually taken as choosing between models (Burnham and
Anderson 2002: 446).
       The second analysis includes the same tautosyllabic data, but the heterosyllabic data from
Table 4, in which the rime shapes of the second syllables more closely match those of our
experimental data. The analysis was otherwise conducted in an identical fashion.


(4)    Result of logistic regression with subset of bisyllables
                                       Coefficient Standard error P (>|z|)
                                        Estimate
       Intercept                         –1.35          0.30      <0.001
       Syllabification                    1.28            0.31         <0.001
       C-Context                         –2.91            1.05          0.006
       C-Context * Syllabification       –1.85            1.27          0.145



                                                  12
The picture is largely the same: the main effects are both statistically significant at the 0.01 level,
while the interaction is not. The baseline expected probability for long vowels in heterosyllabic
contexts with a following singleton is 0.21 (observed 0.21). With a following CC[-cor] cluster, the
expected probability drops to 0.01 (observed 0.01). The expected probability of a long vowel
with a following singleton in a tautosyllabic context is in this case higher than the baseline
heterosyllabic case: 0.48 (observed 0.48). Finally, the expected probability of a long vowel with
a following CC[-cor] cluster in a tautosyllabic context is 0.001. In this analysis, the coefficient for
the interaction does have the expected sign: a CC[-cor] cluster does exert a greater negative
influence on the probability of a long vowel in a tautosyllabic context. However, the lack of
statistical significance of the interaction is again confirmed in model comparison: the chi-square
test again fails to reach significance (p = 0.198). Comparison of the AIC scores again does not
rule out the model with the interaction, which has only a slightly worse score (1615.1) than the
model without it (1614.7).
       In sum, in the larger dataset, there is no evidence at all that syllable structure affects the
strength of the *V!CC[-cor] restriction. In the smaller dataset, there is only very weak evidence of
such an effect. It is difficult to know which of these datasets more closely matches the data that
underly the system that the subjects used to perform our experiment (though see footnote 9). We
thus conclude that there is little or no evidence from the lexicon for the role of syllable structure.


3. Experimental data
To investigate (1) whether the *V!CC[-cor] restriction is internalized by native speakers, and (2)
whether the internalized constraint is syllable-sensitive, we conducted a non-word judgment
experiment. We addressed the first question in terms of whether our Dutch participants show a
greater dispreference for words containing long vowels when a CC[-cor] cluster follows than when
a singleton does. We might have also tested whether the long vowel dispreference is greater
when a CC[-cor] cluster follows than when a CC[+cor] one does, but there is a confound introduced
by morphology. The Dutch suffixes [-s] (plural) and [-t] (second and third person plural) are both
single coronals that attach to consonant-final stems, and so any nonce word containing final [s]
or [t] might be interpreted as bi-morphemic, which would exempt them from the restriction for a
non-phonological reason. Omitting these consonants would overly limit the set of possible
stimuli. We asked the second question in terms of whether this dispreference was affected by


                                                  13
syllabification: whether the word being judged was a monosyllable, in which case the cluster is
tautosyllabic and contained in a single syllable, or a disyllable, in which case the cluster is
heterosyllabic and spans a syllable boundary. In statistical terms, we are asking whether there is
a main effect of cluster presence on long vowel dispreference, and whether there is an interaction
between cluster presence and syllabification.
        The experiment involved a comparative well-formedness judgment task, in which
participants were presented with pairs of nonce words and indicated which item in a pair
sounded more like it could be a real Dutch word. Comparative well-formedness has been found
to bring out finer-grained differences than judgments of single items on a scale (Ohala and Ohala
1986, Berent and Shimron 1997, Coetzee 2009, Daland et al. 2011).4


3.1 Design
        Participants. Participants were 34 native speakers Dutch, all students of Utrecht
University. None reported any hearing difficulties. They were paid a small amount for
participation.
        Materials. A total of 240 stimuli was included, monosyllabic and disyllabic.
Monosyllabic stimuli consisted of four sets of 30 nonce words of the structural types CVC,
CVCC, CV!C, and CV!CC, varying in vowel length (short versus long) and the presence of a
cluster (cluster versus singleton consonant). The clusters consisted of a sonorant [l, r, m] in first
position, and a voiceless obstruent [p, f, k, x] or a nasal [m] in second position. All clusters used
[lp, lk, lm, rp, rf, rm, mp, mk] are attested in monomorphemic words; one cluster was attested
only intervocalically ([mk]). Singleton consonants ending CV(!)C nonce words were [l, r, m],
matching postvocalic consonants of the CV(!)CC items. Disyllabic stimuli consisted of 4 sets of
30 nonce words of the structural types CVC"C, CVCC"C, CV!C"C, and CV!CC"C, all ending in
schwa plus liquid. These again had [l, r, m] in C1, but a slightly wider range of choice for C2,
which also included the voiced obstruents [b, v, x]. Nonce words of the types CV!l(C)"l and
CV!r(C)"r were avoided in order to rule out any possible influence from constraints disfavoring
identical liquids. Stimuli came in short-long pairs: for each nonword containing a short vowel,
there was another that was identical except having a long vowel. Moreover, stimuli came in
4
  We also ran a scalar judgment study, with a 1-7 word-likeness scale, using the same stimuli, and 20
different Dutch participants. We found a highly significant main effect for cluster presence, and an effect
in the predicted direction for the interaction, which did not quite reach significance at the 0.05 level.

                                                    14
cluster-singleton pairs: for each nonword containing a consonant cluster, there was another that
was identical except having a singleton, omitting the cluster's final consonant. Examples of
nonword stimuli are provided in Table 5.


        CVC        CV!C         CVCC         CV!CC

        b!m         ba!m        b!mk         ba!mk
         x"l        xo!l         x"lm         xo!lm


       CVC"C      CV!C"C      CVCC"C       CV!CC"C

       d!m"r       de!m"r       d!mx"r      de!mx"r
        j"l"r       jo!l"r      j"lb"r       jo!lb"r
Table 5. Examples of monosyllabic and disyllabic nonce words.


Nonce words ending in clusters contained zero or low-frequency V(!)CC[-cor] portions. The
rationale was that if speakers have internalized the restriction, then this should generalize to all
V!CC[-cor] sequences, including ones unattested in Dutch (such as [e!mk]). See Appendix A for a
complete list of stimuli.
       Throughout the stimulus set, we controlled for lexical factors and phonotactic probability
in the sets of long-short pairs, e.g. CVC versus CV!C, CVCC versus CV!CC, etc. Two lexical
factors were controlled for between the conditions. The first was Lexical Neighborhood Density
(LND), the sum of the logged token frequencies of a nonce word's neighbors, based on the
CELEX Dutch Phonological Lemmas database. A neighbor was defined as any word that results
from changing, inserting, or deleting a single segment. The second was Cohort Density (CD), the
sum of logged token frequencies of a nonce word's cohort members, where a nonce word's
cohort was defined as all words sharing its first three segments.
       In addition to these lexical factors, we controlled for transitional probabilities of biphones
(TPs). TP values were calculated from word types in the monomorphemic lexicon. The TP for a
biphone xy is defined as p (y|x) = freq(xy)/freq(x), where freq(xy) is the frequency of a biphone
xy, and freq(x) that of the phoneme x. Biphones included word-initial and word-final phonemes
(e.g. [#b] for word-initial [b], or [p#] for word-final [p]). The transitional probabilities of stimuli
as reported in the Appendix were defined as the averaged logged TP value of the biphones in


                                                  15
each stimulus. For example, the transitional probability for [#ba!m#] ("1.030) was calculated as
follows. The TP values of its four constituent biphones [#b], [ba!], [a!m], [m#] (0.081, 0.089,
0.057, 0.187, respectively) were logged ("1.092, "1.049, "1.248, "0.729), then summed
("4.118), and this sum was divided by four, the total number of biphones. In case of biphones
with zero frequencies, smoothing was applied, resetting their frequency to 1. To the 240 stimuli,
124 fillers were added, monosyllabic and disyllabic nonce words, none of which contained
clusters used in the test words.
       The materials were spoken by a female native speaker who was naive to the purposes of
the experiment, and were recorded digitally. Two versions of each stimulus were recorded. After
listening to the recorded stimuli, we eliminated any that contained hesitation or noise, and
generally selected the ones that sounded most natural. To form the test items, the stimuli were
paired into 120 long-short pairs, such that each stimulus pair only minimally differed in vowel
length, but was otherwise identical. Examples of test pairs are provided in Table 6.


                                   monosyllabic           disyllabic
         CVCC - CV!CC              b!mk - ba!mk        b!mv"r - ba!mv"r
          CVC - CV!C                b!m - ba!m          b!m"r - ba!m"r
Table 6. Examples of monosyllabic and disyllabic nonword test pairs used in the
experiment.


The 120 test pairs were mixed with 120 filler pairs, which all consisted of one test item plus a
filler item from the first experiment (e.g. [b!mv"r] - [xo!l"r]). Each test pair and filler pair was

presented in both orders, so that the total number of trials was 480. Stimulus order was
randomized between participants.
       Procedure. Participants were instructed to select the most word-like item for every pair of
nonce words, using the following (translated) text: “You are going to listen to pairs of nonce
words. Your task will be to determine how much these nonce words sound like real Dutch words.
For each pair, you should select the one that sounds most Dutch-like word: if it is the first one,
press the lefthand button; if it is the second one, press the righthand button”. Responses were
recorded using a button box. Participants listened to stimuli through headphones at a comfortable
level of loudness. The interstimulus interval (time elapsed between the members of the pairs)

                                                  16
was 200 ms. The intertrial interval (time elapsed between the response and the next stimulus
pair) was 500 ms. The response duration was 2500 ms. If no response was made at that point, the
next pair was presented.


3.2 Results
In table 7, we present the proportion of long vowel responses for each of the conditions. Standard
deviations, calculated over subjects, are given in parentheses. Examples of comparison pairs can
be found in the corresponding cells of Table 6.


                     monosyllabic        disyllabic
    singleton                0.41           0.38
                           (0.17)          (0.20)
    cluster                  0.27           0.32
                           (0.17)          (0.18)
Table 7. Proportion of long vowel choices in short-long pairs, with standard deviations.

The frequency of long vowel responses was lower than chance in the singleton conditions. One
possibility is that our distractors were not successful in stopping our subjects from developing a
response bias, perhaps generalizing the ill-formedness of long vowels in the cluster conditions to
others. Nonetheless, even with this possible uniform response bias, differences between
conditions remain. The pattern of responses suggests positive answers to both of our research
questions. Words with long vowels were chosen less frequently when a cluster followed, across
monosyllables and disyllables. In addition, the difference between singleton and cluster was
greater in the monosyllables (0.14) than the disyllables (0.06), suggesting an interaction between
consonantal context and syllabification. This is shown graphically in the steeper slope for
monosyllables in Figure 1.




                                                  17
Figure 1. Proportion long vowel choices across consonantal contexts within syllable
types.


         To test if the observed main effects for cluster and interaction between syllabification and
cluster are statistically reliable, we used a mixed effects logistic regression model (see Baayen
2008 and Jaeger 2008 on the advantages over ANOVAs for the type of data analysed here). As in
the logistic regression analysis of the corpus data presented in section 2, the dependent variable
is vowel length (long = 1, short = 0), though here it corresponds to subjects’ choice on a test pair,
rather than the length of a vowel in a word in the corpus. The binary explanatory variables are
again consonantal context (CC[-cor] cluster = 1, singleton = 0) and syllabification (tautosyllabic =
1, heterosyllabic = 0). The predictor values were centered before the analysis was run.
Experimental items were given random intercepts, and subjects were given random slopes for
consonantal context and syllabification (these random effects were selected through model
comparison). The model was fitted in R using the lmer function of the lme4 package (Bates and
Maechler 2010). We report here only on the fixed effects, whose coefficient estimates, with
standard errors and p values, are shown in (5).




                                                  18
(5)       Result of mixed effects logistic regression on experimental data
                                          Coefficient Standard error p (>|z|)
                                           Estimate
          Intercept                         –0.81          0.16      < 0.001
          Syllabification                    –0.02            0.06          0.691
          C-Context                          –0.30            0.07         < 0.001
          C-Context * Syllabification        –0.12            0.06          0.046


As expected from our descriptive statistics, C-Context has a negative effect on the probability of
selecting a long vowel. Without the random effects, the baseline probability of selecting a long
vowel (in a bisyllable with a following singleton) is 1 / (1 + exp–(–0.81)) = 0.31. This drops to 1
/ (1 + exp–(–0.81–0.30)) = 0.25 when the vowel is followed by a consonant cluster. This effect is
statistically reliable, as indicated by the very low p value for C-Context. Syllabification on its
own has only a very small negative effect, which is not statistically reliable, but the interaction of
C-Context and Syllabification is larger: the model gives a probability of 0.30 to a long vowel
choice in the singleton context in a tautosyllabic case, and 0.22 in the cluster context in a
heterosyllabic case. As shown in (5), the interaction reaches significance at the 0.05 level. We
further confirmed the reliability of this effect by comparing this model with one that has the
interaction removed (from the fixed and random effects). The model with the interaction has an
AIC score of 8954.2, which is better than the score of 8957.1 for the model without it, and the
chi-square test returns a p value of 0.025.The finding of a statistically significant effect for the
interaction supports the hypothesis that syllable structure affects the strength of the *V!CC[-cor]
restriction.
           An alternative account of the effect of Syllabification might be that the long vowels are
phonetically longer in monosyllables than disyllables, and that this increased phonetic duration is
responsible for the greater dispreference for long vowels with a following CC[-cor] cluster.5 To test
this alternative account, we first took measurements of the duration of all of the vowels in our
stimuli. These measurements are summarized in table 8. Each cell contains the average
difference between the long and short members of our test pairs, with standard deviations. These
means indicate that the duration differences between the long and short vowels were in fact


5
    We thank an anonymous reviewer for bringing this possibility to our attention.

                                                     19
greater in the disyllables than in the monosyllables, counter to the premise of the alternative
account.


                      monosyllabic         disyllabic
      singleton            0.07              0.08
                           (0.11)            (0.04)
      cluster              0.05              0.06
                           (0.03)            (0.04)
Table 8. Mean vowel length differences in short-long pairs, with standard deviations in
parentheses

To further explore the role of duration in explaining our experimental results, we performed
mixed effects logistic regressions using the duration differences in the test pairs as an
explanatory variable. In the first analysis we included only duration difference as a fixed effect,
and found that the best model included a random slope for subjects, and a random intercept for
items. Again we discuss only the fixed effect.


(6)     Mixed effects logistic regression with phonetic duration
                              Coefficient Standard error P (>|z|)
                               Estimate
        Intercept               –0.79          0.16      < 0.001
        Duration difference         0.23         0.06         < 0.001


There is a significant effect for duration, but it goes in the opposite direction from that predicted
by the alternative account of our results. Greater difference in duration between the long and
short members of a pair leads to an increase in the probability of a long vowel choice. Even if
one had an a priori reason to expect that greater duration differences should lead to more long
vowel choices, this model does a poorer job of explaining the data than the one in (5), getting an
AIC score of 9005. We also explored models that included both duration difference and
consonantal context as fixed effects, and found that the best one (with duration difference as a
random slope for subjects and a random intercept for items) got an AIC score of 8958, again
worse than the 8954.2 for our preferred model. Because the effect goes in the opposite direction


                                                 20
from predicted, and because models using it do not perform as well as the one incorporating
Syllabification, we reject phonetic duration differences as an alternative account of those aspects
of the data that we attribute to syllable structure. However, there is reason to seek an explanation
for why duration difference has the effect it does. When duration difference is added to our
preferred model, it continues to have a positive effect on the probability of a long vowel choice,
with a p value < 0.001. This shows that its effect is not merely due to a correlation with the other
explanatory variables (they continue to have the same direction of effect, with about same size
and p value).6
        Finally, we return to the question of whether the subject’s judgments can be explained by
segmental sequence probability and word-likeness. Our experimental items were controlled for
measures of these constructs, but we here examine whether residual differences might play a role
in explaining the data. We coded our experimental items for differences in the stimulus pairs for
lexical neighbourhood density (LND), cohort density (CD), and transitional probability (TP) (see
section 2 for definitions). We first performed a logistic mixed effects regression with vowel
length choice as the dependent variable, and centered versions of these three measures and their
interactions as fixed effects. Subject and items had random intercepts. In this analysis, we found
that only the main effect of TP reached statistical significance at the 0.05 level (p < 0.001), as did
the interaction between TP and CD (p = 0.036). The best model that we could find incorporating
these measures (and none others) included only TP as a fixed effect, with TP as a random slope
for subjects and a random intercept for items. This received an AIC score of 8989, much worse
than that of our preferred model.
        When we add TP to the model presented in (5), the result is as shown in (6). The AIC
score is 8933, the best that we found in our model exploration. Along with TP, C-Context
continues to have a highly reliable effect, and the effect of the interaction between C-Context and
Syllabification now approaches statistical significance at the 0.01 level.




6
  One possible explanation for the pattern of duration differences is that our speaker slowed her speech
rate in more marked contexts. It is also possible that subjects’ responses reflect this slowing. We leave the
investigation of the possible role of gradient ill-formedness on speech rate, and the possibility that this
affects judgments, as a topic for further research.


                                                     21
(6)    Mixed effects logistic regression including transitional probability (TP)
                                      Coefficient Standard error P (>|z|)
                                       Estimate
       Intercept                        –0.81          0.16      < 0.001
       Syllabification                   0.02               0.06       0.742
       C-Context                         –0.32              0.07      < 0.001
       TP                                –0.28              0.05      < 0.001
       C-Context * Syllabification       –0.12              0.06       0.016


All of this indicates that TP did affect our subject’s choices, but that this effect does not explain
the same aspects of the data that consonantal context and its interaction with syllabification do.


4. A Maximum Entropy phonotactics account
Our experiment shows that Dutch speakers have knowledge of the *V!CC[-cor] restriction: their
dispreference for long vowels is stronger before a cluster ending in a non-coronal than before a
singleton consonant. The results also show that the force of *V!CC[-cor] is mediated by syllable
structure: the dispreference for long vowels is stronger when the cluster is fully contained in the
same syllable as the vowel. In this section, we provide an account of this aspect of Dutch
phonology in terms of a Maximum Entropy model of phonotactics (Hayes and Wilson 2008) that
incorporates constraints referring to prosodic structure.
       Maximum Entropy phonotactics uses weighted constraints to define a probability
distribution over the space of possible words. As an illustration, we can consider the probability
distribution defined over a small space of monosyllabic words by an arbitrary weighting of two
standard phonological constraints. The constraints penalize long vowels (*V!), and consonants in
coda position (*CODA), assigning a violation score of –1 for each offending structure. The scores
assigned by the constraints to the types of word under consideration are shown in the rows of the
tableau in (7). The first word type, V!CC contains a long vowel, and thus scores –1 on *V!, as
well as two coda consonants, which result in a –2 score on *CODA. The weights of the
constraints are shown beneath the constraint names in the first row: *V! has a weight of 2, and
*CODA has a weight of 1. The column labeled H shows the Harmony of each word type: the sum
of the violation scores, each multiplied by the constraint’s weight (see Smolensky and Legendre
2006 on the history of Harmony in linguistics). Words of the V!CC type have Harmony = (2 # –

                                                 22
1) + (1 # –2) = –4. The next column exp(H) shows the result of raising e (2.72) to the power of
H. A word’s probability is proportional to exp(H); this is shown in the final column labeled p.


(7)    Illustration of Maximum Entropy phonotactics
                     *V!      *CODA
                       2         1       H     exp(H)       p
       V!CC           –1        –2       –4     0.02      0.01
       VCC                      –2       –2     0.14      0.08
       V!C           –1         –1       –3     0.05      0.03
       VC                       –1       –1     0.37      0.22
       V!            –1                  –2     0.14      0.08
       V                                  0     1.00      0.59

This example illustrates several properties of the model. First, well-formedness, defined in terms
of probability, is gradient, ranging from 0.59 for a word with neither a long vowel nor coda, to
0.01 for the V!CC word type. Second, we can see how the constraint weights affect probability:
because *V! has a higher weight than *CODA, words with long vowels (V!) have a lower
probability (0.14) than words with codas (VC, 0.37). And finally, we can see the cumulative
effect of constraint violation: V!CC words have the lowest probability not because they violate
any one constraint that the others satisfy, but because they have a greater number of constraint
violations than the others.
       Our aim is to provide a Maximum Entropy phonotactic grammar that is compatible with
our experimental findings that Dutch speakers have knowledge of the *V!CC[-cor] restriction, and
that they are particularly sensitive to the restriction when the sequence is contained within a
single syllable. We also aim to find the weights for the grammar by training a learner with the
lexical data presented in section 2. This second goal might at first seem to present an
insurmountable challenge: if as our regression analyses suggest, there is little or no evidence for
syllable-sensitivity in the lexicon, how could a learner acquire a syllable-sensitive restriction on
the basis of those data? The answer involves a particular kind of inductive bias: the learner posits
a *V!CC[-cor] constraint that is relativized to prosodic context, and favors a grammar that gives a
significant amount of weight to this constraint.
       As the learning data, we used the lexical counts that were used in the second regression
analysis in section 2. These are the data that most closely match the experimental data: they
exclude coronal-final clusters, and the bisyllables are limited to ones ending in schwa-liquid

                                                   23
clusters. The lexical data are shown in terms of counts and proportions/probabilities in Table 10.


 Word-type     Count       p    Word-type    Count      p
 V!CC[-cor]#        2   0.001 V!CC[-cor]V       1     0.001
 VCC[-cor]#     252     0.075 VCC[-cor]V       71     0.048
 V!C#           523     0.155 V!CV             14     0.009
 VC#            563     0.167 VCV              54     0.036
Table 10. Learning data


        The constraints penalize types of segmental sequence, as in Hayes and Wilson (2008),
and much other research in phonology. We do not employ Hayes and Wilson’s constraint
induction algorithm, since it does not yield prosodically conditioned constraints. Instead, we
employ the full set of constraints of a particular type that apply to our case, with the expectation
that these may well be learned both by humans and by a learning algorithm on the basis of the
observed forms of the language. Like Hayes and Wilson (2008), we have not tailored our
constraint set to yield typological predictions: with different weights, they could yield
implausible outcomes, such as a language that has lower probability of short than long vowels
before tautosyllabic consonants. Our results could equally well be analyzed using a typologically
tailored constraint set, though see Hayes and Wilson (2008), as well as Daland et al. (2011) and
Pater (to appear), for discussion of how phonological typology might be accounted for if
constraints are learned.
        As a first pass at a set of constraints, we can consider the following “biphone”-type
constraints, which penalize each of sequence types under consideration:


(8)     *V!C            Assign –1 to a long vowel followed by a consonant
        *VC             Assign –1 to a short vowel followed by a consonant
        *CC[-cor]       Assign –1 to a consonant followed by a non-coronal


Because constraint interaction is cumulative in the Maximum Entropy model, one might think
that this constraint set could account for the *V!CC[-cor] restriction as the cumulative effect of
*V!C and CC[-cor]. However, the biphone constraints in a Maximum Entropy model will not

                                                24
suffice to account for the Dutch data, for a reason parallel to why the bigram model fails to
account for them (see the discussion in section 2). The problem is illustrated in (9).


(9)    The failure of biphone constraints
                     *V!C *CC[-cor] *VC       H     exp(H)      p
                      2        2        1
       V!CC[-cor]     –1       –1             –4        0.02   0.03
       VCC[-cor]               –1       –1    –3        0.05   0.09
       V!C            –1                      –2        0.14   0.24
       VC                               –1    –1        0.37   0.64



By granting *V!C a greater weight than *VC, and assigning a positive weight to *CC[-cor], we
succeed in making the Harmony of V!CC[-cor] lower than that of the other word types, and thus
making its probability the lowest. However, this also leads to V!C being at least as ill-formed
relative to VC as V!CC[-cor] is to VCC[-cor]. If we take well-formedness to be a function of
Harmony (see Coetzee and Pater 2008 on phonotactics), then the difference between these two
pairs of word types will be equivalent (equal to difference between the weights of *V!C and
*VC). If we take well-formedness to be a function of exp(H) (Hayes and Wilson 2008), or of p,
then the difference between V!C and VC will in fact be greater, since exponentiation makes the
contribution of the V!C vs. VC difference lower when the words also violate *CC[-cor]. Either
way, the outcome is not the one we want.
       We thus require a constraint that will pick out V!CC[-cor] as especially ill-formed. To
produce this constraint as one instantiation of a constraint type, we expand our constraint set to
include the triphone constraints in (10):


(10)   *V!CC[-cor]     Assign –1 to a long vowel followed by a consonant and a non-coronal
       *VCC[-cor]      Assign –1 to a short vowel followed by a consonant and a non-coronal


We also require a constraint to pick out V!CC[-cor]# as opposed to V!CC[-cor]V, so as to make the
short vowel preference stronger when the *V!CC[-cor] violation is tautosyllabic. To produce the


                                                   25
constraint type of which this is an instance, we include domain-specific versions of all of the
constraints, which apply only when the sequence is contained in a single syllable. The domain-
specific version of *V!CC[-cor] is shown in (11).


(11)    *-V!CC[-cor]    Assign –1 to a long vowel followed by a consonant and a non-coronal
                        contained within a syllable


As we mentioned in the introduction, an alternative would have been to expand the segmental
size of the constraints, relativizing V!CC[-cor] to the word-final and prevocalic environments. We
chose to relativize it to prosodic context because we expect that prosodically conditioned
constraints will in general prove more useful to a theory of phonotactics than would extremely
long segmental constraints.
        To find constraint weights, we used the L-BFGS-B method (Byrd et al. 1995) as
implemented in R (R Development Core Team 2010).7 The objective is to find a set of weights
that minimizes the difference between two probability distributions over the space of word-types:
the one supplied in the learning data, and the one defined by the Maximum Entropy grammar.
We used Kullback-Leibler divergence as our measure of difference (Kullback and Leibler
1951).8 The objective function also includes a regularization term or prior that penalizes weights
as they depart from zero. We set a zero minimum on constraint weights and used an L2 or
Gaussian prior, which with a zero minimum is equivalent to penalizing the sum of squared
weights. The strength of the regularization term with respect to error minimization is expressed
in terms of variance in the distribution of weights, so its strength is inversely correlated with its
magnitude. We used two values: 10, which imposes a strong penalty on large weights, and
1,000,000, which imposes a very weak penalty.
        The constraint weights for the two grammars are shown in (12), with ‘Weak’ and
‘Strong’ indicating which regularization term was used in learning (multiple runs get similar

7
  We thank Robert Staubs with providing us with the R script that we used for this purpose. Readers
interested in replicating our analysis can find the necessary materials at
http://blogs.umass.edu/pater/papers/.
8
  Hayes and Wilson (2008) state their objective function in terms of maximizing the likelihood of the
observed forms, which is equivalent to our reformulation in terms of error minimization over probability
distributions (thanks to Robert Staubs and Colin Wilson for discussion).

                                                   26
results). All other constraints were assigned zero weights.


(12)                         Weak        Strong
          *V!CC[-cor]        4.67        0.60
          *CC[-cor]          0.58        0.58
          *-V!CC[-cor]       0           0.27


Our goal is for the learned grammar to reflect the pattern of data from our experiment. Table 11
repeats the probabilities of long vowel choices in each of the four experimental contexts in the
column labeled ‘p long’. In none of the contexts does this probability reach 0.5, even though
there is no general bias against long vowels in the lexicon. As we discussed in section 3, this is
plausibly the result of an experimentally induced response bias. We treat it as such here, and
instead of trying to model it in the grammar, we provide scaled probabilities in the column
labeled ‘p ! 1.22’ which multiply the probabilities by 0.5/0.41 = 1.22, resulting in the highest
probability of long vowel choice being equal to 0.5. The grammatical probabilities of long vowel
choices in each context were derived by dividing the probability that the grammar assigns the
long vowel by the sum of the probabilities of it and the short vowel (i.e. by using the “Luce
choice rule”; Luce 1959). The probabilities thus derived using the ‘Strong’ grammar come close
to matching the scaled experimental probabilities; the grammar learned with the weak
regularization term does not work as well.9


    Context       p long p ! 1.22 Strong Weak
    _CC[-cor]#        0.27       0.33   0.295   0.001
    _C#               0.41       0.5     0.5      0.5
    _CC[-cor]V        0.32       0.39   0.354   0.001
    _CV               0.38       0.46    0.5      0.5
Table 11. Experimental data and probability of long vowel choices derived from grammars

9
  We also ran the same learning simulations with the lexical data used for the first regression analysis,
which included a broader range of bisyllables. The probabilities assigned by the resulting grammar did
not match the experimental data as well as those reported in the text. This might indicate that the subjects
calculated probabilities over just the subset of the lexicon that shared a similar second syllable.


                                                    27
The Strong grammar better matches the experimental probabilities for two reasons. First, the
differences between the _CC[-cor] and _C contexts is not as sharp in the experimental data as it is
in the lexicon. The Weak grammar, which more closely matches the lexicon, has a relatively
high weight of 4.67 on the *V!CC[-cor] constraint, which results in a very low probability of long
vowel choice in the two _CC[-cor] contexts (0.001). Because the Strong grammar was learned with
a much bigger penalty on high weights, the *V!CC[-cor] constraint got a much lower weight of
0.60, which results in a higher probability for long vowel choices in the _CC[-cor] contexts. It’s
worth noting that regularization is not crucial here: the result of experimental judgments being
more diffuse than lexical probabilities could have been obtained in other ways (see e.g. Hayes et
al. 2009 who use a Temperature parameter for this purpose). Second, and more importantly, the
Strong grammar differentiates between the two _CC[-cor] contexts because it assigns a non-zero
weight to *-V!CC[-cor], the version of the constraint relativized to the tautosyllabic context. This
constraint acquired weight because the L2 prior penalizes the sum of squared weights, so that
weight spread between *-V!CC[-cor] and *V!CC[-cor] is preferred to weight on *V!CC[-cor] alone.


5. Conclusions
The results of our experiments show that native speakers have internalized a phonological
constraint that refers to a sequence of three segments. The fact that this constraint cannot be
construed as a combination of two biphone constraints poses problems for both n-gram models
of phonotactics, discussed in the introduction, as well as for phonological models that induce
constraints only of biphone size (see Pierrehumbert 2003).10 A second aspect of our experimental
results is that the internalized representation of this phonotactic constraint is stronger in the
word-final than the word-internal context, which we take to indicate its sensitivity to syllable
structure. While the Hayes and Wilson (2008) model of phonotactics is in principle compatible
with syllable-based phonotactics, their learning model does not induce syllabically conditioned
constraints. In our learning simulation, we showed that with such constraints, a Maximum
Entropy learner trained on corpus data from Dutch ends up with a grammar that matches the

10
    Pierrehumbert (2003: 218) hedges on whether a purely biphone-based theory of phonotactics is
feasible, suggesting that triphone constraints might sometimes be induced. Pierrehumbert does not offer a
fully explicit account of the conditions under which triphone (or even biphone) constraints are posited, so
it is difficult to know whether her theory would permit *V:CC[-cor].

                                                    28
distinctions found in the human judgment data. This supports the general point made by both
Pierrehumbert (2003) and Hayes and Wilson (2008) that probabilistic models, which are
motivated by the gradience of phonotactic judgments, can and should operate over the sorts of
representations developed in phonological theory.


References
Albright, Adam (2009). Feature-based generalisation as a source of gradient acceptability.
       Phonology 26, 9-41.
Anttila, Arto (2008). Gradient phonotactics and the Complexity Hypothesis. Natural Language
       and Linguistic Theory 26, 695–729.
Bailey, Todd, and Ulrike Hahn. 2001. ‘Determinants of Wordlikeness: Phonotactics or Lexical
   Neighborhoods?’, Journal of Memory and Language 44, 568–591.

Booij, Geert (1995). The Phonology of Dutch. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Douglas Bates, and Martin Maechler (2010). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4
   classes. R package version 0.999375-34. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4.

Baayen, Harald (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical introduction to statistics using R.
   Cambridge University Press.

Berent, Iris, Daniel L. Everett, and Joseph Shimron. 2001. Do Phonological Representations
   Specify Variables? Evidence from the Obligatory Contour Principle. Cognitive Psychology
   42, 1-60.

Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink (2009). Praat: doing phonetics by computer (Version 5.1.05)
       [Computer program]. Retrieved May 1, 2009, from http://www.praat.org/
Booij, Geert (1995). The Phonology of Dutch. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burnham, Kenneth P. and David R. Anderson (2002). Model Selection and Multimodel
       Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Chomsky, Noam, and Morris Halle (1968). The Sound Pattern of English. New York: Harper
       Row.
Cohen, Antonie, Carl Ebeling, Klaas Fokkema, and André van Hoik. 1971. Fonologie van het
       Nederlands en het Fries. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Coetzee, Andries. (2009). Grammar is both categorical and gradient. In Steven Parker, ed.,

                                               29
       Phonological Argumentation: Essays on Evidence and Motivation. London: Equinox. 9-
       42.
Coetzee, Andries, and Joe Pater. (2006). Lexically ranked OCP constraints in Muna. Ms,
       University of Michigan and University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Coetzee, Andries, and Joe Pater (2008). Weighted constraints and gradient restrictions on place
       co-occurrence in Muna and Arabic. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 26, 289–
       337.
Coleman, John, and Janet Pierrehumbert (1997). Stochastic phonological grammars and
   acceptability. In Computational Phonology. Third Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group
   in Computational Phonology, Association for Computational Linguistics, Somerset, NJ, pp.
   49–56.

Daland, Robert, Bruce Hayes, James White, Marc Garellek, Andrea Davis and Ingrid Norrmann.
   2011. Explaining sonority projection effects. Phonology 28, 197 - 234

de Groot, A.W. (1931). De wetten der phonologie en hun betekenis voor de studie van het
   Nederlands. Nieuwe Taalgids 25, 225-243.

Frisch, Stephan, Nathan Large, and David Pisoni (2000). Perception of wordlikeness: Effects of
       segment probability and length on the processing of nonce words. Journal of Memory
       and Language 42, 481–496.
Frisch, Stephan, and Bushra Zawaydeh (2001). The psychological reality of OCP-Place in
       Arabic. Language 77, 91–106.
Frisch, Stephan, Janet Pierrehumbert, and Michael Broe (2004). Similarity avoidance and the
       OCP. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 22, 179–228.
Greenberg, Joseph H., and James J. Jenkins (1964). Studies in the psychological correlates of the
   sound system of American English. Word 20, 157-177.
Gussenhoven, Carlos (2009). Vowel duration, syllable quantity, and stress in Dutch. In Kristin
       Hanson and Sharon Inkelas (eds). The Nature of the Word. Essays in Honor of Paul
       Kiparsky. Cambridge, MA/London, UK: MIT Press. 181-198.
Hayes, Bruce. (2004). Phonological acquisition in Optimality Theory: the early stages. In René
   Kager, Joe Pater and Wim Zonneveld (eds.) Constraints in Phonological Acquisition.
   Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. pp. 158-203


                                               30
Hayes, Bruce, and Colin Wilson (2008). A maximum entropy model of phonotactics and
       phonotactic learning. Linguistic Inquiry 39, 379–440.
Bruce Hayes, Kie Zuraw, Péter Siptár, and Zsuzsa Londe. 2009. Natural and Unnatural
       Constraints in Hungarian Vowel Harmony. Language 85. 822-863.
Hulst, Harry van der (1984). Syllable structure and stress in Dutch. Dordrecht: Foris.
Jaeger, T. Florian. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from ANOVAs (transformation or
       not) and towards logit mixed models. Journal of Memory and Language 59, 434-446.
Jurafsky, Daniel, and James Martin. (2000). Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction
       to Natural Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational Linguistics.
       Prentice-Hall.
Kager, René (1989). A Metrical Theory of Stress and Destressing in English and Dutch.
       Dordrecht: Foris.
Kager, René, and Wim Zonneveld (1986). Schwa, syllables, and extrametricality in Dutch. The
       Linguistic Review 5, 197-221.
Kullback, Solomon and Richard Leibler (1951). On information and sufficiency. Annals of
       Mathematical Statistics 22(1): 79-86.
Luce, R. Duncan (1959). Individual choice behavior: a theoretical analysis. New York: Dover.
Martin, Andrew (to appear). Grammars leak: Modeling how phonotactic generalizations interact
       within the grammar. In Language.
Moulton, William (1962). The vowels of Dutch: Phonetic and distributional classes. Lingua 11,
       294–312.
Nooteboom, Sieb (1972). Production and perception of vowel duration: A study of durational
       properties of vowels in Dutch. Doctoral dissertation, Rijksuniversiteit Utrecht.
Ohala, John J. (1986). Consumer's guide to evidence in phonology. Phonology Yearbook 3, 2-36.
Ohala, John J., and Manjari Ohala (1986). Testing hypotheses regarding the psychological
       manifestation of morpheme structure constraints. In J. Ohala and J. Jaeger (eds.)
       Experimental Phonology. Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 239–252.
Oostendorp, Marc van (2000). Phonological Projection. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Pater, Joe (to appear). Canadian raising with language-specific weighted constraints. In
       Language.
Pater, Joe, and Anne-Michelle Tessier (2006). L1 phonotactic knowledge and the L2 acquisition


                                               31
       of alternations. In Roumyana Slabakova, Silvina Montrul, and Philippe Prévost (eds.),
       Inquiries in Linguistic Development: Studies in Honor of Lydia White. John Benjamins
       Publishing Company, Amsterdam/Philadelphia. 115-131.
Pierrehumbert, Janet (2003). Probabilistic phonology: Discrimination and robustness. In R. Bod,
       J. Hay and S. Jannedy (eds.) Probability Theory in Linguistics. Cambridge MA: The MIT
       Press. 177–228.
Prince, Alan, and Paul Smolensky (1993/2004). Optimality Theory: Constraint interaction in
       generative grammar. Technical Report, Rutgers University and University of Colorado at
       Boulder, 1993. Revised version published by Blackwell, 2004.
Prince, Alan, and Bruce Tesar. 2004. Learning phonotactic distributions. In René Kager, Joe
   Pater and Wim Zonneveld (eds.) Constraint in Phonological Acquisition. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press. pp. 245-291.

R Development Core Team (2010). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
   Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org

Rietveld, A.C.M. and V. J. van Heuven. 2009. Algemene Fonetiek. Bussum: Coutinho.

Rietveld, Toni, Joop Kerkhoff, and Carlos Gussenhoven (2004). Word prosodic structure and
   vowel duration in Dutch. Journal of Phonetics 32, 349-371.

Smolensky, Paul, and Géraldine Legendre (2006). The Harmonic Mind. Cambridge MA: MIT
       Press.
Trommelen, Mieke (1983). The Syllable in Dutch: With special reference to diminutive
       formation. Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Wilson, Colin and Marieke Obdeyn. 2009. Simplifying subsidiary theory: statistical evidence
       from Arabic, Muna, Shona, and Wargamay. Ms, The Johns Hopkins University.




                                              32
Appendix. Stimuli used for the nonword judgments

LND CVC         lexical neighborhood density of the short vowel item
LND CV!C        lexical neighborhood density of the long vowel item
CD CVC          cohort density of the short vowel item
CD CV!C         cohort density of the long vowel item
2TP short       biphone transitional probability of the short vowel item
2TP long        biphone transitional probability of the long vowel item
TP2 delta       difference in biphone transitional probability between short and long vowel items

CV(!)C monosyllables

 short      long     LND LND         CD      CD     2TP    2TP    2TP
                     short   long   short   long   short   long  delta
b(m      ba!m        2.234 1.849      6.38    6.51 -0.975 -1.030 0.055
d&m      de!m        1.979 1.822      6.71 101.19 -1.210 -1.231 0.021
d$l      dil         2.049 2.315      2.99 21.00 -1.145 -1.111 -0.034
f(r      fa!r        1.526 2.385     20.98    9.17 -1.210 -1.151 -0.059
f'l      fo!l        2.115 2.021     31.24    6.67 -1.143 -1.218 0.075
h%m      hum         2.135 2.126      7.48    0.60 -1.044 -1.204 0.160
j&l      je!l        2.063 2.035      0.00    0.78 -1.193 -1.381 0.188
j$r      ji!r        2.424 2.522      0.00    0.00 -1.572 -1.619 0.047
j%r      jy!r        2.373 2.587      9.13 17.44 -1.180 -1.239 0.059
k&m      ke!m        1.735 2.034     23.17    1.26 -1.100 -1.191 0.091
k%m      kum         2.021 2.017      1.15    5.42 -1.140 -1.209 0.069
l$m      lim         1.834 2.470     11.11 18.54 -1.162 -1.221 0.059
l%m      lum         2.057 1.854      8.04    1.90 -1.124 -1.307 0.183
l%r      ly!r        1.788 2.107      3.18    1.70 -1.158 -1.199 0.041
n$l      nil         1.749 2.416      0.00    0.00 -1.246 -1.274 0.028
n'l      no!l        2.278 1.841      2.13    0.00 -1.243 -1.232 -0.011
p%m      pum         1.660 1.765      3.89    2.16 -1.083 -1.221 0.138
r$r      ri!r        1.823 2.485      0.00    0.00 -1.248 -1.095 -0.153
s(l      sa!l        2.184 2.223     15.84 54.45 -1.020 -1.042 0.022
s'r      so!r        1.705 2.207     18.57 25.18 -1.071 -1.156 0.085
.'l      .o!l        1.886 2.050      0.00    0.00 -1.204 -1.232 0.028
t(r      ta!r        1.774 2.662     26.29 22.50 -1.063 -1.064 0.001
t$r      ti!r        2.173 2.351      0.00 29.92 -1.327 -1.151 -0.176
x(m      xa!m        2.123 1.962      8.54    5.84 -1.100 -1.132 0.032
)&m      )e!m        2.120 1.764      0.60 16.76 -1.086 -1.139 0.053
)'r      )o!r        2.299 2.614     93.27 68.61 -1.115 -1.267 0.152
x&m      xe!m        1.654 1.763      5.82 19.27 -1.125 -1.192 0.067
x'l      xo!l        2.112 1.874     52.43 12.47 -1.072 -1.118 0.046
z(m      za!m        2.113 1.873      1.93    3.94 -1.205 -1.225 0.020
z&l      ze!l        2.493 2.124    225.47 15.06 -1.114 -1.070 -0.044
mean                 2.016 2.137     19.54 15.61 -1.156 -1.197 0.041
t-test                  p = 0.082      p = 0.65        p= 0.15




                                                33
CV(!)CC monosyllables

 short     long   LND LND         CD      CD     2TP    2TP    2TP
                  short   long   short   long   short   long  delta
b(mk     ba!mk    2.189 1.034      6.38    6.51 -1.288 -1.332 0.044
d&rx     de!rx    2.458 1.307     59.20 20.96 -1.404 -1.419 0.015
d$lp     dilp     0.727 1.845      2.99 21.00 -1.330 -1.303 -0.027
f$lk     filk     2.636 1.870     85.32 57.77 -1.327 -1.323 -0.004
f'lm     fo!lm    1.755 2.731     31.24    6.67 -1.321 -1.380 0.059
h(mk     ha!mk    1.777 1.561     15.32 19.19 -1.323 -1.369 0.046
h'lm     ho!lm    1.693 1.808     52.90 13.73 -1.212 -1.239 0.027
j%lm     julm     4.043 0.670      4.04    9.50 -1.298 -1.447 0.149
j%rm     jyrm     2.116 0.000      9.13 17.44 -1.290 -1.336 0.046
j&rx     je!rx    2.445 0.000      0.00    2.16 -1.473 -1.616 0.143
j'lm     jo!lm    0.778 0.000      0.60    5.43 -1.370 -1.313 -0.057
k&mk     ke!mk    2.039 4.391     23.17    1.26 -1.388 -1.461 0.073
k$rf     kirf     1.044 1.632      6.39 13.24 -1.385 -1.277 -0.108
k$rp     kirp     1.314 2.054      6.39 13.24 -1.397 -1.289 -0.108
l%mk     lumk     0.000 0.699      8.04    1.90 -1.407 -1.553 0.146
l%rm     lyrm     1.079 1.699      3.18    1.70 -1.272 -1.305 0.033
l%rp     lyrp     0.602 1.699      3.18    1.70 -1.333 -1.366 0.033
m$rp     mirp     0.984 2.220      2.87 28.19 -1.438 -1.272 -0.166
n$mk     nimk     0.903 0.000     10.51    9.74 -1.562 -1.589 0.027
p&rx     pe!rx    2.231 1.541    217.41 49.87 -1.308 -1.354 0.046
p'lm     po!lm    1.554 1.884     37.99 178.10 -1.248 -1.270 0.022
s(mk     sa!mk    0.301 2.660      5.46 275.11 -1.375 -1.404 0.029
t%mp     tump     1.036 0.349      1.80    1.30 -1.147 -1.262 0.115
v(mk     va!mk    2.241 0.477      8.94    0.48 -1.414 -1.424 0.010
)&mk     )e!mk    2.117 2.143      0.60 16.76 -1.377 -1.419 0.042
x(mk     xa!mk    1.785 0.000      8.54    5.84 -1.388 -1.413 0.025
x&mk     xe!mk    2.324 2.158      5.82 19.27 -1.408 -1.461 0.053
x'lm     xo!lm    1.873 1.614     52.43 12.47 -1.264 -1.301 0.037
z(mk     za!mk    3.443 3.213      1.93    3.94 -1.472 -1.488 0.016
z'lm     zo!lm    2.241 0.477     19.45    7.38 -1.329 -1.320 -0.009
mean              1.724 1.579     23.04 27.40 -1.352 -1.377 0.025
t-test               p = 0.30       p = 0.74        p= 0.29




                                             34
CV(!)C"L disyllables

 short     long   LND LND         CD      CD     2TP    2TP    2TP
                  short   long   short   long   short   long  delta
b(m"r    ba!m"r   2.046 2.056      6.38    6.51 -0.925 -0.961 0.036
d&m"r    de!m"r   1.823 1.609      6.71 101.19 -1.081 -1.095 0.014
f(r"l    fa!r"l   2.061 1.914     20.98    9.17 -1.069 -1.030 -0.039
f$r"l    fi!r"l   0.000 1.173      9.73    6.86 -1.167 -1.037 -0.130
h&m"r    he!m"r   1.418 1.685     20.53 56.94 -0.974 -1.030 0.056
j%r"l    jy!r"l   0.000 1.415      9.13 17.44 -1.050 -1.088 0.038
j'l"r    jo!l"r   1.412 1.190      0.60    5.43 -1.093 -1.046 -0.047
k%m"r    kum"r    2.381 2.118      1.15    5.42 -1.034 -1.080 0.046
k&m"r    ke!m"r   1.714 1.822     23.17    1.26 -1.008 -1.069 0.061
k$r"l    ki!r"l   2.076 1.942      6.39 13.24 -1.088 -0.998 -0.090
l%m"r    lum"r    1.571 1.412      8.04    1.90 -1.024 -1.146 0.122
l%r"l    ly!r"l   1.517 1.699      3.18    1.70 -1.035 -1.062 0.027
l$m"r    lim"r    1.508 1.707     11.11 18.54 -1.050 -1.089 0.039
n(r"l    na!r"l   0.977 2.297     20.62 30.44 -1.085 -1.054 -0.031
n$l"r    nil"r    1.610 1.628      0.00    0.00 -1.121 -1.139 0.018
n'r"l    no!r"l   2.445 1.658     49.96 77.20 -1.065 -1.089 0.024
p%m"r    pum"r    1.991 1.944      3.89    2.16 -0.997 -1.089 0.092
p(l"r    pa!l"r   1.286 1.677     36.30 47.61 -0.952 -0.971 0.019
p$l"r    pil"r    1.386 1.400     14.59 18.63 -0.992 -0.990 -0.002
p'l"r    po!l"r   1.346 1.721     37.99 178.10 -0.992 -1.010 0.018
r&l"r    re!l"r   1.802 1.094      7.10 57.74 -1.001 -1.028 0.027
s$r"l    si!r"l   2.263 1.643     59.36 44.90 -1.106 -0.937 -0.169
s'l"r    so!l"r   1.132 1.372     52.40 37.16 -1.030 -1.055 0.025
s'r"l    so!r"l   2.178 1.415     18.57 25.18 -0.976 -1.033 0.057
t%m"r    tum"r    1.237 1.481      1.80    1.30 -1.048 -1.144 0.096
v(m"r    va!m"r   2.087 2.829      8.94    0.48 -1.030 -1.038 0.008
w&l"r    we!l"r   1.509 1.516    253.73 14.82 -0.945 -0.986 0.041
w&m"r    we!m"r   1.440 1.546      0.60 16.76 -0.999 -1.034 0.035
x(m"r    xa!m"r   1.776 1.993      8.54    5.84 -1.008 -1.029 0.021
x'l"r    xo!l"r   1.060 1.022     52.43 12.47 -1.005 -1.036 0.031
mean              1.568 1.666     25.13 27.21 -1.032 -1.046 0.014
t-test               p = 0.44       p = 0.85        p= 0.29




                                             35
CV(!)CC"L disyllables

 short     long     LND LND         CD      CD     2TP    2TP    2TP
                    short   long   short   long   short   long  delta
b(mv"r   ba!mv"r    0.000 0.000      6.38    6.51 -1.205 -1.236 0.031
d&mx"r   de!mx"r    0.000 0.000      6.71 101.19 -1.479 -1.491 0.012
d$lk"r   dilk"r     2.468 1.954      2.99 21.00 -1.153 -1.134 -0.019
d$lp"r   dilp"r     0.000 2.564      2.99 21.00 -1.176 -1.157 -0.019
f(lb"r   fa!lb"r    0.000 0.000     10.12 14.53 -1.338 -1.306 -0.032
f(rx"l   fa!rx"l    0.000 0.000     20.98    9.17 -1.349 -1.315 -0.034
f(rv"l   fa!rv"l!   0.000 0.000     20.98    9.17 -1.175 -1.141 -0.034
h%mv"r   humv"r     0.000 0.000      7.48    0.60 -1.244 -1.336 0.092
j%rm"l   jyrm"l     0.477 0.000      9.13 17.44 -1.130 -1.164 0.033
j'lb"r   jo!lb"r    0.000 0.000      0.60    5.43 -1.336 -1.295 -0.040
j'lm"r   jo!lm"r    0.000 0.000      0.60    5.43 -1.214 -1.173 -0.040
k%mb"r   kumb"r     0.000 0.000      1.15    5.42 -1.098 -1.137 0.039
k%mk"r   kumk"r     0.000 0.000      1.15    5.42 -1.241 -1.280 0.039
k&mx"r   ke!mx"r    0.699 0.000     23.17    1.26 -1.417 -1.468 0.052
k$rf"l   kirf"l     0.000 0.000      6.39 13.24 -1.238 -1.161 -0.077
k$rx"l   kirx"l     0.000 0.000      6.39 13.24 -1.365 -1.288 -0.077
k$rp"l   kirp"l     0.000 0.000      6.39 13.24 -1.197 -1.120 -0.077
l%rb"l   lyrb"l     0.000 0.000      3.18    1.70 -1.212 -1.235 0.023
l$mx"r   limx"r     0.000 0.000     11.11 18.54 -1.452 -1.486 0.034
n'rb"l   no!rb"l    0.000 1.869     49.96 77.20 -1.238 -1.258 0.021
p&lb"r   pe!lb"r    0.000 0.000     22.12 12.44 -1.211 -1.250 0.039
r&lx"r   re!lx"r    0.000 0.000      7.10 57.74 -1.312 -1.335 0.023
s'rv"l   so!rv"l    0.000 0.000     18.57 25.18 -1.095 -1.144 0.049
t%mp"r   tump"r     1.158 0.778      1.80    1.30 -1.045 -1.127 0.082
w&mx"r   we!mx"r    0.000 0.000      0.60 16.76 -1.409 -1.439 0.030
w&mk"r   we!mk"r    2.690 1.114      0.60 16.76 -1.210 -1.240 0.030
x(mk"r   xa!mk"r    0.000 0.000      8.54    5.84 -1.218 -1.236 0.018
x(mv"r   xa!mv"r    0.000 0.602      8.54    5.84 -1.276 -1.294 0.018
x'lb"r   xo!lb"r    0.000 0.000     52.43 12.47 -1.260 -1.286 0.026
x'lm"r   xo!lm"r    0.000 0.000     52.43 12.47 -1.138 -1.164 0.026
mean                0.250 0.296     12.35 17.58 -1.248 -1.257 0.009
t-test                 p = 0.79       p = 0.29        p= 0.75




                                               36
