            Eötvös Loránd University of Sciences
                    Faculty of Humanities




                          ABSTRACT




                       Roland Nagy




The phonological integration of loanwords in Dutch




            Supervisor: Dr. Erzsébet Mollay, CsC


             Doctoral School in Linguistic Sciences
          Doctoral Programme in Germanic Linguistics


                           Budapest
                             2010
1 Introduction


The least stable and most mutable part of language is the lexicon. In language contact
situations, words are the first to be borrowed from one language to another (Coetsem
1988:26; Thomason and Kaufman 1988:37)             However, words are units combining
multiple levels of language in themselves. In the process of borrowing, they may carry not
only their semantic features to the borrowing language, but some of their formal properties
as well (Sankoff 2002:658). These formal properties include their sound shape: sounds,
phonological segments and their sequences, prosodic features, and stress (Heffernan 2005;
LaCharité and Paradis 2005).
        Most of the time, the sound shape of loanwords conforms to the phonology of the
borrowing language (Bloomfield 1934:445 ff.). However, in the case of long and dynamic
language contact, it may retain some of its non-native sound elements (Benkő 1987:197 f.).
Loanwords may carry sounds, prosodic and phonotactic patterns that are unknown in the
borrowing phonology, e.g. the nasal vowel [ɑ̃], the [krʋ] consonant sequence, or the stress
on the last syllable in the Dutch loanword croissant [krʋasˈɑ] 'croissant'. Some of these
foreign elements and structures are short-lived, sooner or later they disappear from the
borrowing phonology, cf. the pronunciation of croissant in present day informal northern
Dutch: [krˈɑsɑnt]. However, there are foreign sound elements that get anchored in the
borrowing language: these are the subject of the present dissertation.
        The international literature on loan phonology has grown substantially in the past
decade (e.g. Kenstowicz 2007; Kertész 2006; Adler 2006; Boersma and Hamann 2009).
Recent studies concentrate primarily on online phonetic and phonological processes taking
place in the speaker of the borrowing language (e.g. Peperkamp and Dupoux 2003;
Heffernan 2005). Very few works have been devoted to the historical aspects of the foreign
phonological influence (e.g. Crawford 2008; Ito and Mester 1995). Regarding Dutch, only a
handful of short articles have been published in the topic (Oostendorp 2000; Velde and Hout
2002; Bezooijen and Gerritsen 1994). With the present thesis I intend to provide some new
insights in the field.




                                              1
2 The aim and subject of the thesis


          In the present thesis I examine non-native sound segments and phonotactic patterns
occurring in loanwords in the history of Dutch. The analysis is set in the context of the
native phonological system, lexical borrowing and social contacts, i.e. language internal and
language external factors.
          The thesis is descriptive and diachronic in character. It is limited to the segmental
level, i.e. borrowed prosodic structures are not discussed. In the analysis, I consider
language an abstract, social formation whose internal structure, including its phonology,
corresponds to the totality of the language competences of all its native speakers in a given
period.
          In this thesis I try to answer the following questions:
    1. Which segmental phonological changes in the history of Dutch can directly or
          indirectly be associated with the influence of loanwords?
    2. What is the diachronic impact of lexical borrowing on phonology, i.e. what kind of
          parallels can be drawn between the two?
    3. Which language external (sociolinguistic), and language internal structural
          (phonological) factors influence the phonological effects of borrowing?
    4. What place do borrowed segments and segment sequences occupy in the phonology
          and lexicon of Dutch, i.e. how "Dutch" are they?



3   Structure of the Thesis


After the general introduction (I), I give an overview of the major general linguistic
literature in the field, then I present the theoretical framework for the research with a
conceptual and terminological background.
          Beginning with chapter III I turn to the concrete subject of my research, i.e. Dutch.
First, I present a synopsis of the historical periods of Dutch with special emphasis on its
historical phonology. This serves as framework for the analysis of phonological borrowings
in chapter V.
          After the diachronic synopsis, I turn to a major subfield of my topic and present a
brief overview of the history of lexical borrowing in Dutch and its socio-linguistic



                                                  2
background. The aim is to set phonological borrowings in the framework of lexical and
sociolinguistic changes.
       Chapter V is the discussion of the main subject of the thesis. I examine segmental
changes in the history Dutch that can be attributed to the influence of loanwords. I discuss
their history and determine their place in the borrowing sound system.
       Chapter VI summarizes the main results of the thesis. Here, I answer the questions
posed in the introduction, and briefly describe some possible directions for further research.
A final Appendix (VII) contains the diachronic sound charts for reference.



4   Summary of the individual chapters



      II. Theoretical foundations


In the first part of this chapter I present an overview of the major topics concerning the
development of loan phonology in a number of important linguistic studies from the 19th
and 20th centuries. The summary is by no means exhaustive. Only some of the most
prominent works of the "traditional" linguistic trends (the Neogrammarians, structuralism
and the classical generative framework) are discussed (e.g. Paul 1920; Saussure 1967;
Trubetzkoy 1962; Jakobson and Halle 1956; Bloomfield 1934; Weinreich 1964; Chomsky
and Halle 1968; King 1969).
In the second part of the chapter, I introduce the concrete framework of my thesis. I use a
structural framework which is primarily borrowed from Frans van Coetsem's Loan Phonology
(1988). The following table gives a summary of the most important terms of phonological
borrowing:




                                              3
Recapitulating table of phonological borrowing (1988:10 f., 14 f. 16 ff.)
                         SOURCE                                RECIPIENT LANGUAGE
     LANGUAG:
                       LANGUAGE                   message                       language code

     PROCESS:                             phonological borrowing         integration: lexical diffusion

                      phonological
                                                                                        part of native
     ELEMENT:         element of the             loan-segment
                                                                                         phonology
                     source language
                       fr. mar ch e                                                 phoneme substitution:
                                                         [mɑrʃ]       adaptation
                     [mɑrʃ] 'to march'                                               du. mɑr s 'to march'
                                                                                           spelling
                        fr. parfum        imitatio                                     pronunciation:
                                                         [parfɛ ]̃
                     [parfɛ̃] 'parfume'      n                                      du. parf um [parfʏm]
     EXAMPLES:
                                                                                          'parfume'

                                                                      integration
                      fr. centrifuge                                                   du. centrifu g e
                      [sɑ̃ trifˈyʒ(ə)]               [sɛntrifˈyːʒə]                  [sɛntrifˈyːʒə] 'spin-
                        'spin-dryer'                                                        dryer'


     FUNCTION:                               can be inserted in the recepient language (functional)

   ADAPTABILITY:                              adaptable                                 not adaptable

    VARIATION:                                    variation                              no variation

 NONNATIVENESS:           foreign                               non-foreign continuum




      III. Outline of the history of Dutch; summary of the phonological systems

      of the historical periods.


       This chapter gives an overview of the historical periods of Dutch. I define each
linguistic period in time and space. I present a summary of the sound system of each period.
The aims of this chapter are
       (1) to provide a structural phonological background for the analysis of phonological
           borrowings in chapter
       (2) to help to define more clearly the relationship between the effects of
           phonological borrowing and sociolinguistic change
       (3) to provide a somewhat deeper linguistic description of the history of Dutch for
           the first time in Hungarian


                                                     4
     IV. The source of phonological borrowing: lexical borrowing


The aim of the analysis of lexical borrowing is to explore the connection between its source
(the donor language), its rate (the number of words borrowed) and its intensity (the
distribution of borrowing in time) to the changes in the native phonology. The first part of
this chapter describes the social history of lexical borrowing in Dutch with respect to the
four major source languages: Latin, French, English, and German. In the second part I
present a brief overview of the make-up of the vocabulary of Dutch in time and according to
source languages.



     V. Analysis of the phonological outcomes of lexical borrowings in the
     history of Dutch


In this section, I examine the history of foreign segments and sequences in loanwords, and
their impact on the native phonology. I present phonological changes which are the results
of foreign influence, and in particular: lexical borrowing. I explore the two basic types of
foreign phonological influence: recipient language agentivity, i.e. phonological borrowing,
and source language agentivity, i.e. the influence of the language use of non-native speakers
on the recipient language's phonology. The two major types of change concerning the
phonological loans are also described, i.e. adaptation (i.e. adjustment to the recipient
phonological system) and integration (i.e. incorporation into the recipient phonological
system). Their possible causes, chronology, and the connections between social and lexical
changes are also discussed.
       The chapter is divided into three sections according to historical periods. The three
periods of the history of Dutch are different in two aspects. First, they differ in the
sociolinguistic setting which also has an effect on the phonological processes (Old-Dutch:
very few written monuments, minimal literacy; Middle-Dutch: few written monuments,
growing literacy; New-Dutch: wide range of written monuments, widespread literacy).
Second, different methods can be used for their analysis.
       I began the analysis of the two earlier periods by browsing through the literature for
references to possible foreign phonological influence. Then, I checked the contemporary and
present-day forms and occurrences of the given words in the historical and modern



                                              5
dictionaries. The results obtained in these two ways were then investigated in depth in order
to reconstruct the actual phonological processes in detail.
       The main part of the present thesis is the chapter on New-Dutch. The method used in
this chapter is somewhat different from the one used in the historical chapters. Here, the
starting point was not the "discovery" of foreign phonological influence, but its exhaustive
analysis. In this chapter, New-Dutch phonological borrowings are analysed with a method
not yet employed in the Dutch literature. The major points of my method were as follows:
             1. Using pronunciation, and other dictionaries providing phonetic data, I built a
                corpus with standard Dutch loanwords containing loan-segments (Coninck
                1970; Heemskerk and Zonneveld 2000; Bastiaansen 2008; Boon and Geeraerts
                2005).
             2. I collected all alternative pronunciation variants, and adapted forms, pl.
                cartoon [kɑrtˈuːn]~[kɑrtˈun] 'id.'.
             3. Item by item I checked the etymological dictionaries for the direct source
                language and the first appearance of the word in written form (e.g. Philippa
                et al. 2004; Franck 1892).
             4. Finally, I checked all the data with two standard Dutch native speakers (one
                from the Netherlands, one from Belgium). With their help I verified every
                pronunciation variant, and their use (general, rare, archaic etc.). On the
                whole, there were no significant discrepancies between the dictionary corpus
                and the data of the native speakers.
During the exploitation of the database, I was searching the answer to the following
questions:    (1) what is the origin of the given sounds (were they borrowed from one
particular language or more languages?) (2) How long have they been present in the Dutch
(3) What place do they occupy in Dutch phonology (are they "full-fledged" members of the
sound system, or just occasional, temporary and marginal elements?) (4) Which factors have
facilitated and still facilitate integration, and what are the most common ways of
adaptation?
       Through the analysis of the database, I could determine the "age" of loan segments in
Dutch. The analysis supported the conclusion drawn from the discussion of Middle-Dutch:
the ʒ was indeed integrated into Middle-Dutch phonology through Old-French loanwords, as
opposed to the ʃ, which was then? in all cases adapted, and integrated only in the New-
Dutch period. The age of a given loan-segment and the intensity of lexical borrowing show


                                                6
significant conformity, e.g. the integration of tʃ corresponds to the intensive period of
borrowing from English in the 20th century. Further results of the research are treated in
the next section.



5    Summary of the results


The results of the research are formulated in the answers to the questions posed in the
introduction. Most of these answers have general linguistic significance.


    a. Which segmental phonological changes in the history of Dutch can directly or
        indirectly be associated with the influence of loanwords?


In the majority of the cases discussed, the changes in Dutch phonology were caused by the
foreign phonological elements or structures carried by loanwords. This includes the cases
where the given element or structure integrated into the native phonology, e.g. the ir
sequence or the ʒ in Old-Dutch. However, there were foreign segments which caused no
phonological change, but lost their nonnativeness markers instead, and were adapted to the
native phonology, cf. the Old-French affricates in Middle-Dutch, e.g. OF. chartre  MD.
sarter 'charter'.
        The phonological changes discussed in the Old- and – to some extent – the Middle-
Dutch period were most probably not induced by the loanwords themselves, but the very
intensive overall linguistic influence of French. Therefore, these changes did not occur as the
result of recipient language agentivity, but rather of source language agentivity. This
conclusion is supported (a.) by the low number of loanwords to which the sound change
could be ascribed, (b.) by the regularity with which the sound "law" took place, and (c.) the
very intensive social and linguistic contact between the source- and recipient language at
the time.


    b. What is the diachronic impact of lexical borrowing on phonology, i.e. what kind of
        parallels can be drawn between the two?


The present research has supported the assumption that lexical factors have a deep impact
on phonological borrowing. A correlation can be established between lexical and

                                              7
phonological borrowing in two aspects: quantity (i.e. the number of loanwords in which the
phonological loan is present) and time (the length of time for which the phonological loan is
present in the borrowing language, i.e. its age).
   With regard to the quantity of lexical borrowing and its effect on phonological
    borrowings, it can be pointed out that an increasing number of loanwords correlates
    with an increasing number of phonological borrowings. Owing to the substantial
    increase in the number of loanwords in the New-Dutch period, more loan segments
    appeared at this time than before, e.g. the three new vowel sequences, which include ten
    vowels: iː, yː, uː, œː, ɛː, ɔː, ɑː, ɛ̃, ɔ̃, ɑ̃.
            In the case of the individual loan-segments, the number of loanwords may not
    necessarily be determinant, cf. the short-long œː, which appears only in twelve
    loanwords, or the phonetically long yː, which appears in just three. Yet, both segments
    are integral part of the Dutch sound system. This means that the stability of the
    phonological loan is also determined by other factors in the recipient language, than the
    number of loanwords (for these factors see section c.) On the other hand, the adaptation
    of a phonological loan may be hindered by a large number of loanwords, cf. the nasal
    vowels and the ʃ in present-day Dutch.
   The age of borrowing is not determinant with respect to the phonological loan. The ʃ
    could not integrate during the Middle-Dutch period, although Dutch had been borrowing
    words with it for centuries. The same segment has successfully been ? integrated in New-
    Dutch, due to phonological changes that created the structural basis for its integration.
    Yet, it is remarkable that all the loan-segments discussed in the New-Dutch period have
    been present in the language for one or two hundred years. In the meantime they have
    increased their stability by continually appearing in new loanwords.
   Concerning the source language, it is notable that at first each loan-segment is borrowed
    in words from only one language. Only later do they appear in words from other
    languages.
   The reason for which neither the quantity, nor the age of the borrowing is determinant
    for the integration of loan-segments is that the phonological loan – as it is bound to a
    word – exerts its influence word by word, i.e. it spreads by lexical diffusion. That is the
    explanation why it differs so much from source language agentivity, which works like
    sound changes, i.e. not with regard to lexical elements, but to segments. In the present
    thesis the different character of source- and recipient language agentivity have been


                                                      8
   represented by two Old-Dutch vowelshifts (ē>ie; ū>ȳ) and the integration of the ʒ
   respectively.


   c. Which language external (sociolinguistic), and language internal structural
       (phonological) factors influence the phonological effects of borrowing?


Foreign phonological influence is intimately connected to the changes of intensity in the
sociolinguistic contact. The changes discussed in the Old-Dutch period are most probably
the result of source language agentivity and not of lexical borrowing, e.g. ū>ȳ. The Middle-
Dutch changes are partly, e.g. the diphthongisation of ui1, still to be attributed to this type
of agentivity. However, in New-Dutch, there is no trace of this process. This corresponds
closely to the sociolinguistic setting of the three periods: the intensity of the contact
diminishes continuously. The very intensive contact between the Dutch and the French
speaking communities in the Old-Dutch period diminishes continuously through Middle-
Dutch to New-Dutch. The interrelation between the intensity of language contact and the
type of agentivity is demonstrated rather clearly by Dutch: dynamic contact=source
language agentivity; less dynamic contact=both source and recipient language agentivity;
still less contact=only recipient language agentivity.
       Literacy and orthography also play an important role in phonological borrowing. The
influence of the written form has clearly been demonstrated in the case of adaptation, cf. the
spelling pronunciation s for ʃ in Middle-Dutch, as well as in the case of integration, cf. the
integration of the ps- sequence. Orthography functions as a nonnativeness marker. This is
not only true for foreign letters, such as <x>, but also for the foreign phoneme-grapheme
correspondences, such as the between <j> and [dʒ] in recent English loanwords. That is
why the spreading of literacy had a major effect on phonological borrowing. The integration
of affricates in New-Dutch, and the adaptation of plaats 'place' as plaas can also be ascribed
to this influence.
       The results of my analysis have also underpinned the general assumption that the
syntagmatic level of language is more susceptible to change than the paradigmatic level
(Coetsem 1988). Most of the phonological borrowings presented in the thesis, caused
reordering of the native phonological elements, e.g. the tʃ could successfully integrate as it
was interpreted a combination of the phonemic t and the allophonic ʃ. In other words, its
integration affected the paradigmatic level only indirectly. The integration of the same


                                              9
segment was prevented in Middle-Dutch by the fact that there was no allophonic ʃ in the
native phonology, so the integration of tʃ would have caused a direct paradigmatic change.
The integration of the New-Dutch nasal vowels can also be interpreted as a syntagmatic
change, since the nasal feature is allophonically present in the post lexical phonology. The
integration of the ʒ in Middle-Dutch is a remarkable case, because it was a direct
paradigmatic change: a new palato-alveolar place feature entered the phonology. Although
this integration can, to a large extent, be ascribed to the very frequent French -ge [ʒə] suffix,
the precise circumstances are not yet clarified, and are open for further research.


    d. What place do borrowed segments and segment sequences occupy in the phonology
        and lexicon of Dutch, i.e. how "Dutch" are they?


It is very difficult to assign the place of borrowed segments and segmental patterns in the
phonology of the borrowing language. There are certain factors by which the degree of
integration can be specified. However, the proportion of adapted forms and the age of the
segment in the borrowing language are both rather vague specifications to define the place
of a borrowing in the non-native continuum. Although some of the segments discussed have
been present in Dutch for centuries, they still have adapted variants in a few words, e.g. the
short-long ɛː, which is already about 400 years old in Dutch, still has adapted form: parterre
[pɑrtˈɛːrə]/[pɑrtˈɛrə] 'pit (in a theatre)'.
        The difficulty of the question lies in the fact that words carrying a phonological loan
are bound together by a cohesive force. The bases of this cohesion are nonnativeness
markers. New members may join the group, others may be left out, but the group itself
remains in one. In the present thesis, I have only explored one of these cohesive forces, i.e.
the loan-segment itself. Orthography, stress, morphological behaviour, meaning – they are
all nonnativeness markers that keep certain groups of morphemes together. Therefore, it is
impossible to answer the last question adequately. New research in several fields is needed
to provide a satisfying answer. One of these fields is, for example, the investigation of actual
language use that can give a more realistic picture of the ways of adaptation and possible
variation (cf. Bezooijen and Gerritsen 1994).




                                                10
6   Areas for further research


A logical further step in the research would be the analysis of those loan-segments that have
not been discussed in this thesis, e.g. the velar plosive g in words, such as goal 'id.'. This
segment has been missing from the native phonology for centuries. Is there a change in this
respect? Other segments that should be analysed are ɟ and ɲ, e.g. djembé [ɟˈɛmbe] 'African
drum', oranje 'orange (colour)'. Although these two sounds are usually analysed as sequences
of segments (ɟ=dj, ɲ=nj), my personal survey with native speakers (syllabification tests)
contradict this assumption, for most speakers are ambivalent towards these sounds. The
present thesis can be interpreted as a first step in the analysis of all the loan-segments of
Dutch. Besides an exhaustive analysis of all loan segments in Dutch, the analysis of foreign
influences in the native phonotactics is also a promising area. Another possible direction for
further research would be a deeper analysis of the historical facts, e.g. concerning the
integration of ʒ.




7   References

Adler, Allison. 2006. Faithfulness and perception in loanword adaptation: A case study from
       Hawaiian. Lingua 116.1045, 1024.
Bastiaansen, Cora (ed.) 2008. Groot woordenboek hedendags Nederlands. 4th ed. Utrecht: Van
       Dale.
Benkő, Loránd. 1987. A történeti nyelvtudomány alapjai. Budapest: Tankönyvkiadó.
Bezooijen, Renée van, and Marinel Gerritsen. 1994. De uitspraak van uitheemse woorden in
       het Standaard-Nederlands. Een verkennende studie. De Nieuwe Taalgids 87.145-160.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1934. Language. London: Allen & Unwin.
Boersma, Paul, and Silke Hamann. 2009. Loanword adaptation as first-language
       phonological perception. Loan phonology, ed. by Andrea Calabrese, 11-58.
       Amsterdam ;;Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub. Co.
Boon, Ton den, and Dirk Geeraerts (eds.) 2005. Groot Woordenboek Van De Nederlandse Taal.
       14th ed. Utrecht: Van Dale Lexicografie.
Chomsky, Noam, and Morris Halle. 1968. The Sound Pattern of English. New York, Evanston,
       and London: Harper & Row, Publishers.
Coetsem, Frans van. 1988. Loan Phonology and the Two Transfer Types in Language Contact.
       Publications in language sciences. Dordrecht, Holland: Foris Publications.

                                             11
Coninck, René de. 1970. Groot Uitspraakwoordenboek Van De Nederlandse Taal. Antwerpen:
       De Nederlandsche Boеkhandel.
Crawford, Clifford. 2008. An evolutionary account of loanword-induced sound change in
       Japanese. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 16.
       http://repository.upenn.edu/pwpl/vol14/iss1/5/.
Franck, Johannes. 1892. Etymologisch woordenboek der Nederlandsche taal. 's-Gravenhage:
       Martinus Nijhoff. http://www.archive.org/details/etymologischwoo00frangoog.
Heemskerk, Josée, and Wim Zonneveld. 2000. Uitspraakwoordenboek. Utrecht: Het Spectrum.
Heffernan, Kevin. 2005. Phonetic similarity and phonemic contrast in loanword adaptation.
       Toronto Working Papers in Linguistics 24.117-123.
Ito, Junko, and Armin Mester. 1995. The core-periphery structure of the lexicon and
       constraints on reranking. (Ed.) Jill Beckman, Suzanne Urbanczyk, and Laura Walsh.
       University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics [UMOP] 18: Papers in
       Optimality Theory.181-209.
Jakobson, Roman, and Morris Halle. 1956. Fundamentals of Language. 's-Gravenhage: Mouton
       & Co.
Kenstowicz, Michael. 2007. Salience and similarity in loanword adaptation: a case study
       from Fijian. Language Sciences 29.316-340. doi:10.1016/j.langsci.2006.12.023.
Kertész, Zsuzsa. 2006. Approaches to the phonological
       analysis of loanword adaptation. The Even Yearbook. The Even Yearbook.
       seas3.elte.hu/delg/publications/even/2006/06ke.pdf.
King, Robert D. 1969. Historical Linguistics and Generative Grammar. Englewood Cliffs, N.J:
       Prentice-Hall.
LaCharité, Darlene, and Carole Paradis. 2005. Category Preservation and Proximity versus
       Phonetic Approximation in Loanword Adaptation. Linguistic Inquiry 36.223-258.
Oostendorp, Marc van. 2000. 'Leenwoordfonologie' in het Esperanto. Gramma 7.137-148.
Paul, Hermann. 1920. Prinzipien Der Sprachgeschichte. 5th ed. Halle a. S.: Max Niemeyer.
Peperkamp, Sharon, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2003. Reinterpreting loanword adaptations:
       the role of perception. (Ed.) Josep Sola-Solé. Proceedings of the 15th International
       Congress of Phonetic Sciences Barcelona, 3-9 August 2003 15.367-370.
Philippa, Marlies, F. Debrabandere, Arend Quak, T.H. Schoonheim, and Nicoline van der Sijs
       (eds.) 2004. Etymologisch Woordenboek Van Het Nederlands. Amsterdam: Amsterdam
       University Press. http://www.etymologie.nl/.
Sankoff, Gillian. 2002. The Linguistic Outcomes of Language Contact. The Handbook of
       Language Variation and Change, ed. by J. K Chambers, Peter Trudgill, and Natalie
       Schilling-Estes, 639-668. Blackwell Handbooks in Linguistics. Malden, MA:
       Blackwell.
Saussure, Ferdinand de. 1967. Bevezetés az általános nyelvészetbe. (Trans.) Éva B. Lőrinczy.


                                              12
       3rd ed. Budapest: Gondolat.
Thomason, Sarah Grey, and Terrence Kaufman. 1988. Language Contact, Creolization, and
       Genetic Linguistics. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Trubetzkoy, Nikolay Sergeevich. 1962. Grundzüge der Phonologie. 3rd ed. Göttingen: Van Den
       Hoeck & Ruprecht.
Velde, Hans van de, and Roeland van Hout. 2002. Uitspraakvariatie in leenwoorden. (Ed.)
       Philippe Hiligsmann and E. Leijnse. NVT-onderwijs en -onderzoek in Franstalig gebied
       1.77-95.
Weinreich, Uriel. 1964. Languages in Contact. Findings and Problems. 2nd ed. London, The
       Hague, Paris: Mouton & Co.




                                               13
