Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
(KNAW)


Quantity and the Three-Syllable WIndow in Dutch Word Stress
van Oostendorp, M.



published in
Language And Linguistics Compass
2012




document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record




Link to publication in KNAW Research Portal




citation for published version (APA)
van Oostendorp, M. (2012). Quantity and the Three-Syllable WIndow in Dutch Word Stress. Language And
Linguistics Compass.




General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

       • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the KNAW public portal for the purpose of private study or
research.
       • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain.
       • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the KNAW public portal.

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.


E-mail address:
pure@knaw.nl




Download date: 25. Aug. 2026
Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339




Quantity and the Three-Syllable Window in Dutch Word
Stress
Marc van Oostendorp*
Meertens Instituut, Amsterdam & Leiden University



Abstract
This paper considers the state-of-the-art in the (generative) study of Dutch word stress. In the past
25 years, consensus has been reached on a number of properties of the Dutch stress system, such
that it obeys the so-called three-syllable window and that it is quantity sensitive. However, not all
of these arguments are equally convincing in the light of modern developments in phonological
theory, in particular since experimental data on native speakers’ intuitions are missing. Although
there is strong evidence for quality-sensitivity (in particular to the quality of schwa), the evidence
for quantity-sensitivity is not so strong, given that the main sources of loanwords (which are
usually argued to be quantity-sensitive) themselves are quantity-sensitive.



1. Introduction
The representation of word stress in Dutch has been a topic of quite some research in
generative phonology. The generally accepted view is that this stress system is not very
different from that of other West-Germanic languages such as German (Wiese 2000),
English (Hammond 1999) and Frisian (Visser 1997). For all these languages, it has been
claimed that main stress falls on one of the last three syllables of the word, and that it is
partly unpredictable, and partly determined by phonological regularities such a syllable
quantity.
   In this article, I will give critical evaluation of the literature, with an emphasis on Van
der Hulst (1984), Trommelen and Zonneveld 1989, Kager (1989), Nouveau (1994), Van
Oostendorp (1997) and Gussenhoven (2009). As far as I can tell, almost all major publica-
tions are based on the assumption that Dutch has a quantity-sensitive stress system, i.e.
the difference between light and heavy syllables is somehow taken into account in the
computation of stress. In generative terms, this meant that quantity-sensitivity was consid-
ered to somehow be part of the native speaker’s knowledge of the stress system.1
   I show that the empirical basis for this assumption has never been strong. Certain regulari-
ties exist, but (i) there are ‘exceptions’ to these as well, and (ii) at least some of the regulari-
ties find an explanation in other factors, e.g. in the fact that most borrowings themselves
have been taken from languages with a quantity-sensitive stress system. If the regularities are
not very strong and if there is no reason to assume that speakers have knowledge of these
regularities, there is little reason to try to describe them in phonological terms – at least if we
believe that the ultimate goal of phonology is to describe knowledge of sound systems.
   With respect to point (i) just mentioned, the reasoning has usually been that the
exceptions should be marked in the lexicon. Also the more recent OT literature on
Dutch stress assignment (Nouveau 1994; Oostendorp (1997); Geerts 2008; Gussenhoven
2009) has adopted this assumption. The methodological question which arises in this
case is how we decide which forms are the rule and which are the exceptions and, if all

ª 2012 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
344 Marc van Oostendorp

patterns are possible, why we need to assume that there is a process of ‘assigning’ stress at
all.
   Implicitly, the answer to this has usually been to relegate as much work to the grammar as
possible. Underlying this assumption is one of representational economy: the best account is
one which posits the smallest number of specifications in the lexicon. This idea of economy
seems mostly abandoned, for instance in the advent of theories such as Government Phonol-
ogy and Optimality Theory, which makes the whole enterprise of devising an algorithm for
assigning mostly unpredictable stress spurious. The literature on stress, which stems mostly
from the 1980s and 1990s, has so far not been reevaluated under this light, however.
   The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 I discuss the so-called three-sylla-
ble window, the claim that Dutch stress is on one of the last three syllables of the word.
Subsequently, we move to various types of weight which have been assumed to be rele-
vant for stress assigment. Section 3 discusses the role of schwa and the distinction
between light and heavy syllables. Section 4 provides an overview of the relevant data on
so-called superheavy syllables. Section 5 closes off with a discussion on the way in which
we should evaluate at the first sight rather mixed results on quantity-sensitivity in Dutch.

2. The Three-Syllable Window
The examples in (1) show that Dutch stress is at least partly lexical: These pairs of words
differ from each other only in the location of stress, not in their segmental content or
any other lexical property.

(1) kanon ‘gun’ [ka'n n] canon ['kan n] ‘norm’
                                        c                          c

If Dutch stress were indisputably a purely unpredictable property of words, there obvi-
ously would not be a lot of discussion about it. Every word would have its specification
of a stress position in the lexicon, and the phonological grammar could stay silent. How-
ever, all scholars on Dutch of the past decades seem to agree that there are several restric-
tions as to the position of primary stress (Booij 1995; Daelemans et al. 1994; Geerts
2008; Gussenhoven 1993, 2009; Kager 1989; Kager and Visch 1983; Kager et al. 1987;
Kager and Zonneveld 1986; Kooij 1978; Lahiri and Kooreman 1988; Langeweg 1988;
van Marle 1980; Neijt and Zonneveld 1982; Nouveau 1994; van Oostendorp 1997;
Rietveld et al. 2004; Trommelen 1991; Trommelen and Zonneveld 1989, 1999; Visch
and Kager 1984; Van Zonneveld 1984; Zonneveld 1993, 2003). The strongest consensus
is probably on the claim that Dutch is subject to a three-syllable window, familiar also
from many other Indo-European languages. Stress outside of this window, i.e. on the
preantepenultimate syllable of the word, is indeed rarely attested:

(2) *['makaroni]

In spite of this general consensus, it is hard to find clear evidence that this window plays or
has ever played an active role in the synchronic phonology of Dutch. As is well known,
(West-)Germanic had systematic initial stress, so we might expect long words of this origin
to have shifted; but it is difficult to find monomorphemic West-Germanic forms which
have the required length. Trommelen (1989) argues that at least verbs tend to have at most
one full vowel plus an optional schwa-headed syllable. Also longer nouns are borrowed
from other languages. The relevant words in contemparary Dutch thus have all been

ª 2012 The Author                                                      Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                       Dutch Word Stress 345

loanwords at some stage. The original West Germanic pattern changed under the influence
of Latin or French or other Indo-European languages, in which the lexicon respects the
three-syllable window already. The macaroni example in (2), for instance, is from Italian,
in which all words except for the third person plural of some verbs respect the window
(Krämer 2009): in order to get a window violation in the Dutch word, we would have to
disrespect the Italian original and there seems little reason to do so.
   As a matter of fact, there are two known classes of exceptions to the generalisation.
The first consists of toponyms such as Scheveningen, Amerongen and Wageningen; the second
is a class of Latin grammatical terms such as infinitief, accusatief and nominatief which all
have initial stress. Admittedly, these two classes are small, but there is no specific reason
to see these words as somehow not belonging to the Dutch lexicon or as being more
foreign to it than many of the trisyllabic words. Actually, a CELEX search2 shows a
few more individual examples:

(3) reutemeteut ‘caboodle’, ammelaken ‘table cloth’, tingeltangel ‘honkeytonk’, Erlenmeyer
      ‘Erlenmeyer flask’

The list is obviously not very long, two of the words have some reduplicative quality to
them (however that may be interpreted from a theoretical point of view), ammelaken is a
word which was unknown to the author of this article and which may have a com-
pound-like quality to those who do know it, and erlenmeyer is eponymous – while names
have been argued to have a separate stress pattern.
   The crucial argument that Dutch respects the three-syllable window thus is that excep-
tions may be ignored by phonological theory as long as they are few in number. It is not
so evident, however, what this argument is based on. In order to make it precise, let us
assume a concrete analysis of Dutch stress, for instance within Optimality Theory. The
three-syllable window could be made to follow from the (plausible) assumptions that
Dutch has trochaic feet,3 that stress is typically on the rightmost of these feet, and finally
that the last syllable can be ‘extrametrical’ (not parsed into a foot), or ‘catalectic’ (i.e.
empty, so that a word ending in a phonological bisyllabic trochee ends in a stressed sylla-
ble phonetically). This complex will give us the impossibility of preantepenultimate stress
allowing all other possibilities:4
(4) makaroni                                           STRESS RIGHTMOST FOOT                        PARSE-SYLLABLE
         (maka)('roni)
      ('maka)roni                                                                                             W*
      ('maka)(roni)                                                W*

   But we somehow have to include words like infinitief into the picture. One way to do
this would be to mark stress on this word and assume that faithfulness to this marking is
dominant:5
(5) 'infinitief                              FAITHFULNESS            STRESS RIGHTMOST                     PARSE-SYLLABLE
                                                                               FOOT
           a ('infi)nitief                                                                                            *
      b ('infi)(nitief)                                                         W*                                    L
      c (infi)('nitief)                              W*                                                               L


ª 2012 The Author                                                   Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
346 Marc van Oostendorp

   Obviously, however, as soon as faithfulness outranks everything else, we are no longer
really saying that there is a three-syllable window in the language. The constraints are
there, but they are low-ranked, as in any language which does not satisfy them at all.
One way out would be to assume that this ranking is specific for words such as infinitief,
etc. (for instance because there is a cophonology applying only to grammatical terms and
a few other words). The issue is, however, that it is not clear what would be gained by
this latter move as compared to the assumption that faithfulness is dominant for all words,
and it just happens that most words have stress somewhere on one of the last three sylla-
bles. In other words, although it is clear that there is a statistical tendency of avoiding
preantepenultimate stress, it is not clear why this should be turned into an absolute truth,
also because there is an alternative explanation which may be even more suitable for the
pattern at hand: the words have kept their original stress pattern from the source
language.
   Crucial evidence would come from the way in which loanwords from languages with-
out a three-syllable window are treated, but I have not been able to find an uncontrover-
sial instance of this in the literature. Furthermore, showing that words from those
languages get regularized to e.g. penultimate stress, would not be sufficient. It could be
that penultimate stress simply is the default (that definitely seems the most likely position
for such a status), so that we need to show that loanwords never get regularized to ante-
penultimate or ultimate stress. As far as I am aware, evidence about this is lacking.
   Another type of evidence would be alternations such as we find for instance in Greek.
In this language, if we combine a stem that has antepenultimate stress with a clitic or a
suffix, the stress shifts [in the case of clitics, the stress on the noun is kept as some kind
of secondary stress, see (6a–b); this is not the case for the inflectional suffix in (6d)]:

(6)     a.      góndola (id) > gondolá-mu ‘my gondola’
        b.      o jı́tonas ‘the neighbour’ > o jı́tonás mas ‘our neighbour’
        c.      cf. stafı́da > stafı́da-mu (without stress shift)
        d.      to máthima ‘the lesson’ > to mathı́matos ‘of the lesson’

Dutch lacks any alternations of this type. This should not be counted as evidence against
a three-syllable window, since there simply are also no clitics or suffixes forcing violation
of this putative constraint. The evidence is thus completely neutral on this point. But the
lack of alternations of this type would make it definitely hard for a language-learner to
detect the activity of the putative constraint.
   The little evidence we do have in the literature concerns a study by Nouveau (1994)
on the acquisition of stress, where the author used nonsense words to test children’s
knowledge. Two of these nonsense words had the required length (both of them were
four syllables long). Two parts of Nouveau’s study are relevant for our present purposes.
In the first place, Nouveau did a ‘pretest’ with 20 adult informants, who were asked to
read the words aloud. The stress was then transcribed. It turned out that no informant
was ever tempted to put stress on the first syllable of such long words (P.ant = preante-
penultimate, Ant = antepenultimate, Pen = penultimate, Fin = final):

(7)                          P.ant        Ant       Pen        Fin
        karabilo             0            1         18         1
        monitaron            0            6         8          6


ª 2012 The Author                                                    Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                            Dutch Word Stress 347

These data are suggestive, but one would of course need more of them to start making
statistical sense. Furthermore, the fact that in a group of 20 individuals nobody puts the
stress on the first four syllables, does not necessarily mean that it is disallowed on that syl-
lable; notice that all other words in the experiment were shorter, so that the bias could
even be due to some repetition effect inherent in the experimental design (people got
used to putting stress on one of the last three syllables, because these were usually the
only syllables available).
   The second piece of information which might be relevant, although even more diffi-
cult to interpret, is the result of the experiment with (3- and 4-year-old) children. They
were presented with a doll which was given a name by the researcher. This name was
one of the nonsense words combined with one of the logically possible stresses. After a
while, the children were asked to repeat these names, and it was recorded whether they
did so correctly or not.

(8)     Three-year-olds
                    P.ant                 Ant        Pen           Fin
        karabilo    65%                   30%        20%           65%
        monitaron 50%                     35%        45%           55%
        Four-year-olds
                    P.ant                 Ant        Pen           Fin
        karabilo    70%                   30%        5%            50%
        monitaron 60%                     35%        65%           55%

These tables should be read in the following way. When children were asked to repeat
kárabilo, 65% of the 3-year-olds did so incorrectly; when they had to repeat karábilo, 30%
made a mistake, etc. (Only mistakes were counted that influenced the stress pattern, such
as replacing the accent, or deleting certain syllables, etc.)
   We have performed a similarly small online study in which informants (26 participants,
all from the Netherlands, all with Dutch as their native language) were asked about the
stress patterns in (Dutch versions of) biblical names. Most of these names are unknown
even to many observant Jews and Christians, for instance because they occur only once
in the bible. Informants got a list of approximately 50 names, and had to indicate where
(main) stress should be according to their intuition. The study presented here is a pilot
study, but it shows data very similar to those of Nouveau:

(9)                                 P.P.ant         P.ant          Ant   Pen       Fin
        timnatcheres                –               42             0     42        3
        parsandata                  –               23             15    50        0
        leviatan                    –               19             7     69        3
        hermogenes                  –               7              46    38        0
        benhinnomdal                –               3              69    11        3
        akrabattene                 19              3              23    42        0
        apollonia                   7               11             76    0         7

As a matter of fact, it turns out that in these words the preantepenultimate syllable was
systematically preferred as a stress location over the final syllable, although this difference
is rather small in each case. It is possible that in some of these cases the names were anal-
ysed as being compounds, which may explain then some of the stresses outside of the

ª 2012 The Author                                                        Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
348 Marc van Oostendorp

three-syllable window, but that would merely show that Dutch speakers consider long
words impossible.
   Obviously, these data are less supportive of the idea that Dutch has an active constraint
against preantepenultimate stress, although it does show that there may be a default, or at
least a preference for penultimate stress. Although children made a lot of ‘errors’ when
having to repeat the ‘impossible’ pattern, they also did so for other positions, and in some
cases even more so (e.g. the penultimate position on monitaron triggered more errors in
four-year-olds than the preantepenultimate). Of course, also this can hardly be counted as
an argument against such a constraint either; the evidence is again simply neutral. How-
ever this may be, even though a large majority of words satisfy the constraint, clear evi-
dence for the three-syllable window as a synchronic constraint of Dutch phonology
seems lacking.

3. Quantity Sensitivity

3.1. SCHWA
Another generalisation for which there is strong scholarly support in the literature is
weight sensitivity. Generally, four levels of weight are distinguished: (i) schwa syllables,
(ii) light syllables, (iii) heavy syllables, (iv) superheavy syllables, where the first are sup-
posed to avoid stress altogether, whereas the last should be always stressed (Daelemans
et al. 1994).
    The evidence that we should distinguish schwa syllables from the rest is strong. There
simply are no lexical words with a schwa syllable carrying lexical stress, although schwa
can carry contrastive stress in very specific contexts:

(10)      Ik      zeg          geen        codá          maar     codé
          I       don’t        say         [kod'a]        but      [kod' ]
                                                                        e

Since such contrastive stress can basically overrule all lexical specifications, we consider
this to be irrelevant for the issue at hand, except that it shows that stress on schwa is not
a phonetic impossibility and therefore that the stress avoidance of schwa outside contras-
tive positions is a phonological fact.
   As a matter of fact, Van der Hulst (1984:233) notes as a tendency that stress immedi-
ately precedes schwa, i.e. in words ending in a schwa-headed syllable, stress is on
the prefinal syllable. Van der Hulst mentions the examples in (a) as an exhaustive list of
‘exceptions’ to this generalisation and a CELEX search yields the additional examples in
(b):

(11)      a.      Mánchester (place name), ármoede ‘poverty’, Nı́jmegen (place name), wéduwe
                   (widow), óórkonde (deed), Bétuwe (place name), Véluwe (place name)
          b.      máluwe (malva), clı́toris (id), s¢yfilis (syphilis), cánnabis (id), sáuriër (saurus),
                   térriër (dog)

However, all of these are somewhat problematic. I am not sure that Manchester counts as
a Dutch word; armoede and oorkonde (and possibly also Nijmegen) could count as prosodic
compounds (see Section 5), the words which are spelled in <is> have a front vowel at
least for me (and furthermore clitoris seems to have penultimate stress for many speakers);

ª 2012 The Author                                                    Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                      Dutch Word Stress 349

and the other forms (weduwe, betuwe, veluwe, maluwe, sauriër, terriër) all end in a sequence
high vowel-glide-schwa, on which see e.g. Trommelen (1983), Zonneveld (1993), van
Oostendorp (2000).
   The line of reasoning we followed in Section 2 to disqualify the three-syllable win-
dow as a generalisation of Dutch synchronic phonology doesn’t apply at least for the
stresslessness of schwa, since there are no exceptions and furthermore, there is an
independent indication that the relation between being unstressed and being schwa is
strong in Dutch. The language has vocalic reduction. Depending on a number of
factors, including the quality of the original vowel, style level of speech and the
syllable structure, unstressed vowels get reduced to schwa. In particular [e] in open
syllables is very sensitive to reduction, so that [e] in stressed position, and [ ] in                                          e
unstressed position are almost in complementary distribution (‘t Hart 1967; Booij
1976, 1982; Kager 1989; Koopmans-van Beinum 1980; van Oostendorp 2000; Zonne-
veld 1993). Since there are alternations and these are triggered by stress, the connec-
tion between metrical weakness and being schwa seems to be a real fact of Dutch
synchronic phonology.

3.2. LIGHT AND HEAVY SYLLABLES
The distinction between light and heavy syllables is a little bit more controversial. We
could raise two issues.6 First, the definition of the distinction is somewhat unusual. Sec-
ondly, we could wonder whether we need to refer to the distinction at all.
   The definition issue is the following one. Disregarding schwa, Dutch has two sets of
vowels: tense vowels, which only occur in open syllables, and lax vowels, which only
occur in closed syllables.7 According to some authors (for instance, Zonneveld 1993;
Kooij and van Oostendorp 2004), this phonotactic pattern can be described by assum-
ing that the tense vowels are phonologically long – many of them are so phonetically
as well, although the high tense vowels are not – and furthermore that every Dutch
syllable is minimally bimoraic. This implies that there are basically two types of syllables
in Dutch: C(C)VV and C(C)VC. The curious thing is, however, that the available evi-
dence seems to point in the direction of CVV being light and CVC being heavy. This
is quite unexpected: existing typologies of syllable weight would predict that it is the
opposite.8
   The evidence in favour of a heavy-light distinction in Dutch is a little bit subtle, to say
the least. I will discuss two types of evidence. In Section 3.3 I will turn to putative evi-
dence that the distinction plays a role in the calculation of secondary stress. Here, I con-
centrate on the special role of the penultimate syllable. Many authors have pointed to the
generalisation in (12):

(12)      When the penultimate syllable is heavy, stress cannot be on the antepenultimate.

(13)      Agénda, fricandéau, *ágenda, *frı́candeau

A careful study based on a word list is provided by Van der Hulst (1984). Assuming
that tense vowels are long, Van der Hulst reports zero words with initial stress for
trisyllabic words of the shapes in (14a); if the penultimate syllable is open, on the
other hand, we do find cases with initial stress. After each pattern we give two num-
bers; the first is the number of words in Van der Hulst’s data which had initial stress,

ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
350 Marc van Oostendorp

the second the total number of words with the relevant syllable profile (Van der
Hulst 1984:223):

(14)      a.      No initial stress when penultimate syllable is closed: VC-VC-VC (0 ⁄ 15),
                   VC-VC-VV (0 ⁄ 28), VV-VC-VC (0 ⁄ 19), VV-VC-VV (0 ⁄ 54)
          b.      Initial stress when penultimate syllable is open: VC-VV-VV (21 ⁄ 72),
                   VV-VV-VV (59 ⁄ 182), VV-VV-VC (60 ⁄ 115), VC-VV-VC (40 ⁄ 66)

However, a CELEX search shows counterexamples for each of the classes in (14a) that
are supposed to be impossible:

(15)      a.      ’VC. VC. VC                      mangistan, badminton
          b.      ’VC. VC. VV                      chimpanzee
          c.      ‘VV.VC.VV                        shoarma
          d.      (VC).’VV.VC.VC                   sanniyasin

I have to add to this that many native speakers in an informal survey put stress
on the heavy syllable in both (c) and (d), so that we could possibly say that words
with a heavy penultimate and a light antepenultimate syllable never have stress on
the latter; but I know of no theory which could make this particular prediction.
(Also, it is clear that the penultimate syllable is a default location for stress, also if it
is light.)
   The following graph shows the differences between stress patterns in words with an
open (blue line) and closed (red, dashed line) penultimate syllable. It can be clearly seen
that in both cases, there is a strong tendency to put stress on that penultimate syllable.
For heavy syllables we find less stress on other positions, but this is true both for the
antepenultimate and the ultimate syllable:




ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                      Dutch Word Stress 351

   The difference between open and closed penultimate syllables is of course still signifi-
cant, but it seems to me that neither chimpanzee nor badminton sounds very eccentric to
the average Dutch ear.
   According to most authors (Van der Hulst 1984; Trommelen and Zonneveld 1989;
Kager 1989; Nouveau 1994), weight is visible on the final syllable as well, albeit in a
slightly more complicated way: in words of the shape VX-VV-VC there is a preference
for initial stress over penultimate stress, which may be caused by the fact that the latter
two syllables do not form a good trochee together. This is confirmed by the following
graph, based again on a CELEX search:




   However, this graph also shows that the other two stress patterns are also possible for
words of this type (as a matter of fact, there are even more cases of stress on the final
syllable), and it is not clear what to make of that.
   Furthermore, it is not clear to what extent a language learner needs to know the gen-
eralisations in (10) in any relevant sense of the word ‘to know’, since this type of weight
sensitivity is present also in the most common source languages for loanwords.
   On the other hand, there is some evidence that stress patterns violating (12) are treated as
marked by the language users: they tend to undergo regularization. This evidence again
comes from experiments with nonsense words. Nouveau’s (1994) test with adults contained
four three-syllabic words with a heavy penultimate syllable. As before, we indicate the num-
ber of informants who assigned initial stress, and the total number of renditions of the word:

(16)      ka-nak-ta            (0 ⁄ 20)
          ma-rot-ko            (0 ⁄ 20)
          ta-lak-tan           (2 ⁄ 20)
          ba-ral-ton           (6 ⁄ 20)

At least in the final case the number of responses which gave initial stress were 1:3, i.e. at
chance level (since there were three syllables). Furthermore, in the first two examples (in


ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
352 Marc van Oostendorp

which the final syllable is open), the fact that there were no stresses on the initial syllable
might be related to the fact that nobody stressed the final syllable in these cases either:
everybody said kanákta and marótko. A further point to note is that the example which
does show final stress is the only one in which the penultimate is closed by a sonorant,
which should count as the ‘heaviest’ of consonants.
  Zonneveld (2003) did a similar experiment with a group of 44 students, and found the
patterns such as the following:

(17)      a.      to-gar-ma              4       39       1
                  te-man-do              3       40       1
          b.      po-tran-dat            7       22       15
                  tri-men-tok            13      20       11

Zonneveld (2003) concludes from this that antepenultimate stress is impossible on words
ending in a VC-VV pattern. This is indeed something that seems to arise from these
experimental data, but as far as I can see it does not take into account the real words
chimpanzee and (possibly) shoarma.
   It thus seems fair to say that there are several statistical tendencies in the lexical mate-
rial, which are partly to be related to weight. The very scarce test data we have indicates
that at least some of these tendencies are reflected in informants’ response to nonsense
words, but these do not reflect very hard facts: there is always variation. Clearly,
much more experimental work is needed here, but in the absence of this, I would con-
clude that there is little reason why analysts have been so uniform in their adoption of
the assumption that Dutch stress is quantity-sensitive; an alternative analysis seems also
feasible.

3.3. QUANTITY IN SECONDARY STRESS
In the literature we find some suggestions that secondary stress might be sensitive to sylla-
ble weight as well. Dutch has a productive process of vowel reduction to schwa in
unstressed position (Booij 1976, 1982; Kager 1989; van Oostendorp 2000; Geerts 2008),
which however is sensitive to a number of factors, such as word frequency and vowel
height which we will not be concerned with here.
   One position where we might see this at work is in the analysis of words of four sylla-
bles of which the last one has primary stress. The first syllable in such words will carry
secondary stress. The other two syllables will both be subject to (optional) reduction
when they are open:

(18)      temperatuur            ['temp r 'tyr]
                                             e           ‘temperature’
          fonologie              ['fon l 'qi]
                                       ee                ‘phonology’
          individu               ['Ind v 'dy]
                                       e e               ‘individual’

A few things should be noted about these examples. First, these forms sound very infor-
mal with reduction, and that is a bit unnatural since long words such as these usually
belong to the learned lexicon. Secondly, the two positions are different in an interesting
way: reduction of the second unstressed position (the one in the third syllable of the
word) implies reduction in the first unstressed position (in the second syllable of the
word). Thus, ['fon lo'qi] is possible, but *['fonol 'qi] is not.
                             e                                        e

ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                           Dutch Word Stress 353

  However, things change when the second syllable is closed, according to Trommelen
and Zonneveld (1989:119):

(19)      constantinopel           [k nstant 'nop l]
                                      e     c             e        ‘constantinople’
          testosteron              [test st 'r n]
                                      c e c                        ‘testosteron’
          conservatief             [k nserv 'tif]
                                       e    c                      ‘conservative’9

Trommelen and Zonneveld (1989) take these data as an argument that the prosodic struc-
tures of (12) and (13) are different: the closed second syllables in (13) are heads of sec-
ondary stress feet, but the open second syllables in (12) are not. A general rule reducing
vowels then treats the two positions differently. (Similar claims have been made for
English by Ross 1972).
   This is not the only option we have, however. Van Oostendorp (1995) suggests that it
is rather the reduction rule which is sensitive to syllable structure. The reason is that
schwa seems to avoid closed syllables also when it is not the result of reduction. For
instance, underlying schwa can not be followed by any (non-coronal) obstruent either.
Furthermore, Booij (1995) notices that reduction is possible in some cases under the con-
dition that the coda consonant is deleted at the same time. But if the reduction rule is
sensitive to the absence or presence of a coda, there is no more reason to assume that
secondary stress placement is.

4. Superheavy Syllables
The last category of syllable weight seems a bit less controversial. Superheavy syllables
– consisting of a tense vowel followed by a consonant or a lax vowel followed by at
least two consonants – are very strong attractors of word stress. They typically occur
at the end of the word, and if they do, they are often stressed (Van der Hulst
1984:217):

(20)      olı́jf ‘olive’, vióól ‘violin’, citróén ‘lemon’, alárm ‘alarm’, protést ‘protest’

However, this generalisation is not exceptionless:

(21)      króépoek ‘krupuk, prawn crackers’, árbeid ‘labour’, vámpier ‘vampire’, nónsens
           ‘nonsense’, ámbacht ‘craft’, ásbest ‘asbestos’, lı́chaam ‘body’

Such words have been analysed as prosodic compounds by Trommelen and Zonneveld
(1989:160), i.e. as words which have the prosodic structure of compounds in spite of the
fact that neither of the constituent parts occurs as an independent word (or in many cases
even as a part in any other compound); in other words, they are seen as compounds
which consist of two cranberry-morphs. Compound stress in Dutch is on the first member
of the compound, at least for nouns (Booij 1995).
   Trommelen and Zonneveld (1989) make a few observations supporting a prosodic
compound analysis, of which we will mention two. The first is that cranberry-morphs
are typically monosyllabic in Dutch, and the exceptional patterns such as those in (15) are
almost all bisyllabic.10 The second concerns the suffixes -elijk and -ig. Trommelen and
Zonneveld (1989) state:

ª 2012 The Author                                                       Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
354 Marc van Oostendorp

(22)      These specific suffixes will normally get attached to base words which have one
           of the following properties: final stress (including monosyllabic words […]);
           or compound.11

Thus the adjectivising suffix -elijk can be attached to fatsóén (‘decency’; stress final) and
stáátsrecht (constitutional law) to derive fatsóénlijk and staatsréchtelijk (notice that stress shifts
in the latter case), but not to únie (union) with penultimate stress (*únielijk, *unı́élijk).
Interestingly, on the other hand the suffix can be attached to lı́chaam ‘body’ to derive
lichámelijk ‘physical’ (with stress shift). Since lı́chaam clearly is not monosyllabic, it follows
from the classification in (16) that it is a compound.
    Neither of Trommelen and Zonneveld’s (1989) arguments may be completely compel-
ling. The observation that cranberry-morphs tend to be monosyllabic is in itself unex-
plained; and suffixation with -elijk (or -ig) is not productive in Dutch (De Haas and
Trommelen 1993). However, taken together, and with the observation that apart from
some bisyllabic cases there seem to be no words ending in unstressed superheavy syllables,
the indications seem to be quite strong that the notion of superheavy syllable does play a
role in the analysis of Dutch.

5. Discussion: Is Dutch Stress Sensitive to Quantity?
We can thus see that there are various statistical tendencies to be shown in the Dutch
lexicon. The strongest among these is probably a preference for penultimate stress, which
for instance has resulted in stress shifts such as notúlen ‘minutes’ (from nótulen) en catalógus
‘catalogue’ (from catálogus).
   Based on previous literature, the evidence for the role of quantity is somewhat para-
doxical. This literature, as summarized above, assumes that there is a four-way scale of
weight for Dutch syllables: C(C) < CV(V) < CVC < CVVC, CVCC. We have seen
that the evidence is rather strong for the lower end of the scale as well as for the
higher end, i.e. that schwa syllables are really weaker and superheavy syllables are really
stronger than other syllables. The evidence for a ‘core’ distinction between heavy and
light syllables is much weaker however. This is a rather curious state of affairs, and in
need of an explanation.
   One direction to go would be to distinguish two types of quantity sensitivity.
Traditionally, sensitivity to quantity implies counting rhyme positions or moras: those
segments with two such positions are heavy, those without two such positions are
light. I would argue that Dutch grammar does not possess this type of counting
mechanism.
   In the case of schwa, the weightlessness issue seems a bit different: both open and
closed schwa syllables count as extra light. It does not seem to be the quantity of seg-
ments but rather the quality of the head which counts.12 I propose that Dutch has the
quality type of weight-sensitivity, but not the quantity type. The relevant generalisation is
the one in (23):

(23)      Syllables with an empty head should occur in the weak position of a trochee.

The intuition behind this is that weak metrical positions should not contain too much
phonological material, and inversely.13 One could debate about the precise definition
of ‘emptiness’, but it does not seem unreasonable to say that schwa is heavily

ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                      Dutch Word Stress 355

underspecified, at least in Dutch, where it functions as an epenthetic vowel and as
the output of vowel reduction (Booij 1995; van Oostendorp 2000). It is thus empty
in a relative sense.
   The claim in (17) can then be generalized to superheavy syllables. Following
McCarthy’s (1979) analysis of Arabic stress, Langeweg (1988) proposes that superheavy
syllables consist of a ‘normal’ syllable followed by an extra consonant. In Zonneveld
(1993) this same idea is formalised as assuming that superheavy syllables are bisyllabic
complexes of which the second syllable consists of an onset consonant only. The pre-
vious syllable can be a closed syllable with a lax vowel or an open syllable with a
tense (possibly long) vowel. This thus implies that there is a one to one correlation
between being tense and being in an open syllable, on which see van Oostendorp
(2000), Botma and van Oostendorp (Ms). Because the second syllable clearly counts as
an empty headed syllable, it should be subject to (23). That is the reason why the
preceding syllable (which contains the audible nucleus of the ‘superheavy’ complex)
attracts stress.
   If we take these two ideas together, we can thus generalize over the behaviour of
schwa syllables and the ‘extra consonant’ of superheavy syllables.14 Both of them
involve emptiness in some sense, and both of them are sensitive to (23) in Dutch. Seen
in this way, Dutch has no quantity sensitivity in the traditional sense of the word. It
has quantity-insensitive trochees with as its only extra restriction that ‘empty’ vowels
should occur in the weak position of a foot (it thus is rather quality-sensitive in some
way).15
   The claim that Dutch is not quantity-sensitive does not mean that the stress system
does not interact with syllable structure at all. Gussenhoven (2009) shows that stressed
tense vowels lengthen. He analyses this within a theory which basically assumes quan-
tity-sensitivity, but we can readily understand the fact without such an assumption. We
find lengthening of stressed vowels in open syllables also e.g. in Italian, a language for
which there is little evidence of quantity sensitivity (Krämer 2009). In terms of Opti-
mality Theory, we may say that faithfulness to underlying length of tense vowels is
irrelevant, and length is determined exclusively by constraints regulating the interaction
with stressed positions. Furthermore, it should be noted that weight considerations
clearly play a role in the Dutch lexicon in the form of tendencies as we have seen
above. In this context, the findings of Daelemans et al. (1994) become relevant. In a
‘data-oriented’ study, these authors showed that machines can acquire the stress pattern
of Dutch with a reasonable amount of succes, and that this success is bigger when
information is provided on the weight of syllables. Unfortunately, Daelemans et al.
worked with a scale which just ran from ‘superlight’ (=schwa) to ‘superheavy’ without
discriminating the various sources of weight which we established above. (Also, much
to their own surprise, they found a small quality effect, not otherwise discussed here:
syllables with [e] tended to attract more stress than would be expected given they posi-
tions they were in. One reason behind this effect is that ⁄ e ⁄ is particularly prone to
schwa reduction; thus, whenever we find an unreduced [e] we can be rather sure that
we are dealing with a stressed vowel.)
   Since these tendencies themselves ultimately may find an explanation in the source lan-
guages from which Dutch has extensively borrowed, there may not be a reason to incor-
porate them into the phonological grammar. The extensive work which Dutch
phonologists did in the 1980s and 1990s has definitely uncovered many interesting statis-
tical generalisations, which need to be explained – but maybe they were not always about
the phonological knowledge of a native speaker.

ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
356 Marc van Oostendorp

Short Biography
Marc van Oostendorp (Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 1967; MA in Linguistics, Tilburg
University, 1991; PhD, Tilburg University, 1995). Currently employed at Meertens Insti-
tute ⁄ Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (Senior Researcher; since 1999)
and Leiden University (Professor of Phonology; since 2008). Previous employers include
the University of Amsterdam. Academic Prizes and Awards include the AVT ⁄ Anéla Dis-
sertation Price for the best linguistics dissertation in the Netherlands (1996), and the LOT
Oeuvre Prize for Popularisation of Linguistics (2007). He serves on the Editorial
Boards of the journals Phonology (CUP) and Language Problems and Language Planning
(Benjamins).

Acknowledgement
I wish to thank my colleagues Geert Booij, Ben Hermans, Björn Köhnlein and Willem
Visser for enlightening discussion. Furthermore, this paper has been considerably
benefited from some comments of two anonymous reviewers. All usual disclaimers
apply.

Notes
* Correspondence address: Marc van Oostendorp, Joan Muyskenweg 25, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1096 CJ. Email:
marc.van.oostendorp@meertens.knaw.nl
1
   A reviewer points out that in his view the mentalistic claim of generative phonology should not be taken too
seriously, and phonologists describe the patterns which they find. The claim of this paper is not just that the men-
talistic claim should be taken more seriously – by eliminating complexities from the Dutch system which do not
belong there we also gain insight in what is a possible phonological system – but also that many of the ‘patterns’ are
less than real: they describe statistic tendencies at best.
2
   CELEX (http: ⁄ ⁄ celex.mpi.nl ⁄ ) is a huge database with Dutch words, based on a number of balanced corpora of
written Dutch. For this article, I have used the section ‘Dutch lemma’s’ and selected only the monomorphemic
words.. Morphology interacts with stress in a very interesting way in Dutch, but that is not the topic of this paper.
3
   One convincing argument for trochaic foot which is not directly based on stress, but rather on an intonational
phenomenon called the ‘chanted call’, can be found in Gussenhoven (1993).
4
   We will just assume trochaic feet, so that the constraint disallowing iambs is not needed in the tableaux.
5
   In this example, the form with only one foot wins, because of the relative ranking of Stress-rightmost and Parse-
syllable. We could also reverse the ranking, in which case (b) would win, which is phonetically equivalent. Since
this is a sample analysis, there is no reason to go into this discussion here.
6
   Booij (1995:101, fn. 8) is one of the few recent sources who cast doubt on the weight sensitivity of Dutch stress.
7
   The generalisation as described here is true word internally. At the edges of word, we can have at most one extra
non-coronal consonant, so that final tense vowels can be in a syllable closed by one, and lax vowels in a syllable
closed by two consonants. Furthermore, one or more voiceless coronal obstruents (s or t) can follow this complex.
8
   This problem can be solved under an alternative view of syllable structure and its relation to segmental phonology
which has it that phonologically tense and lax vowels are all short, the only relevant distinction being one which is
described by a feature such as [tense], [lax] or [ATR], so that Dutch has two types of syllables, of which CV would
be light and CVC would be heavy (van Oostendorp 2000).
9
   Although this is orthogonal to the discussion, I note that I do not personally agree with these judgements. In par-
ticular, I would never pronounce conservatief in the way indicated, but rather as [k ns rvatif] or, in the ultimate case,
                                                                                              e c
[k ns rv tif]. The reason for this could be that the schwa in the second syllable is underlying for speakers like me,
    e e c
and not the result of reduction. I agree with the other judgements.
10
    Trommelen and Zonneveld do not mention exceptions; Van der Hulst (1984) mentions ‘an almost total absence
of exceptions’ to the rule that in trisyllabic words ending in a superheavy syllable the last syllable is stressed, but
does not mention any of the exceptions which he suggests might exist. I suppose ‘olifant ‘elephant’ is one of these.
11
    Deze specifieke suffixen hechten normaal aan aan grondwoorden die een van de volgende eigenschappen heb-
ben: eindklemtoon (inclusief monosyllabisch, en met schwa in de laatste lettergreep; of geprefigeerd); of samenges-
teld (Trommelen and Zonneveld 1989:164).
12
    But see Kager (1989) for arguments that the lightness of schwa should be attributed to it being moraless.


ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
                                                                                                      Dutch Word Stress 357
13
    Similar ideas were expressed in Moortgat and Van der Hulst (1981), Zonneveld (1993) and van Oostendorp
(1995, 1997).
14
    A reviewer points out that Trommelen (1983) has already drawn a connection between superheavy syllables and
schwa syllables. Notice, however, that this connection is a little bit different in Trommelen’s (1983) work: there, it
is pointed out that tense vowels and schwas both can be followed by either nothing or at most one non-coronal
consonant, whereas lax vowels can be followed by one or two non-coronal consonants. (In both cases, more voice-
less coronal plosives may follow.)
15
    Another way in which they might be considered quantity sensitive is the special behaviour of high vowels that
seem to avoid stress. Note that many of the ‘problematic’ cases in (11) have a high vowel in the position where
one would regularly expect stress. Another case which might show the same is the contrast between the names
Unicef (stress on the first syllable) and Unesco (stress on the regular penultimate syllable).


Works Cited
Booij, Geert. 1976. Klinkerreductie in het Nederlands. Leuvense Bijdragen 65. 461–70.
——. 1982. Fonologische en fonetische aspecten van klinkerreductie. Spektator 11. 295–301.
——. 1995. The phonology of Dutch. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Botma, Bert, and Marc van Oostendorp. Ms. A propos of the Dutch vowel system 21 years on, 22 years on, Leiden
  University.
Daelemans, Walter, Steven Gillis, and G. Durieux. 1994. The acquisition of stress. A data-oriented approach. Com-
  putational Linguistics 20(3). 421–51.
De Haas, Wim, and Mieke Trommelen. 1993. Morfologisch handboek van het Nederlands. The Hague: Sdu.
Don, Jan, and Wim Zonneveld. 1988. CV Phonology. Theory and machine in Dutch stress assignment. PRIPU
  13. 8–32.
Ernestus, Mirjam. 2000. Voice assimilation and segment reduction in casual Dutch. Utrecht: LOT.
Geerts, Twan. 2008. More about less. Fast speech phonology: the cases of French and Dutch. Radboud Universiteit
  Nijmegen: PhD Dissertation.
Gussenhoven, Carlos. 1993. The Dutch foot and the chanted call. Journal of Linguistics 29. 37–63.
——. 2009. Vowel duration, syllable quantity, and stress in Dutch. The nature of the word. Essays in honor of Paul
  Kiparsky, ed. by Kristin Hanson and Sharon Inkelas, 181–98. Cambridge, MA ⁄ London, UK: MIT Press.
Hammond, Michael. 1999. The phonology of English. A prosodic-optimality theoretic approach. Oxford: Oxford
  University Press.
Hart, Johan ‘t. 1976. Fonetische steunpunten. De Nieuwe Taalgids 62. 168–74.
——, and Michael Moortgat. 1981. Prosodische fonologie en de accentuatie van Nederlandse woorden, of: Leeft
  het Nederlands op grote voet. Verslag van de 150e vergadering van de Nederlandse vereniging van fonetische
  wetenschappen. Amsterdam. 1–25.
Kager, René. 1989. A metrical theory of stress and destressing in English and Dutch. Dordrecht: Foris.
——, and Ellis Visch. 1983. Een metrische analyse van ritmische klemtoonverschijnselen. Utrecht: MA thesis.
——, ——, and Wim Zonneveld. 1987. Nederlandse woordklemtoon (hoofdklemtoon, bijklemtoon, reductie,
  voeten). GLOT 10. 197–226.
——, and Wim Zonneveld. 1986. Schwa, syllables and extrametricality in Dutch. The Linguistic Review 5. 197–
  221.
Kooij, Jan G. 1978. Aksentregels en syllabestruktuur in het Nederlands. De Nieuwe Taalgids 71. 543–8.
——, and Marc van Oostendorp. 2004. Fonologie. Uitnodiging tot de klankleer van het Nederlands. Amsterdam:
  AUP.
Koopmans-van Beinum, Florien. 1980. Vowel contrast reduction. An acoustic and perceptual study of Dutch
  vowels in various speech conditions. University of Amsterdam: PhD dissertation.
Krämer, Martin. 2009. The phonology of Italian. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lahiri, Aditi, and J. Kooreman. 1988. Syllable weight and quantity in Dutch. WCCFL 7. 217–28.
Langeweg, Simone. 1988. The stress system of Dutch. Leiden University: PhD dissertation.
van Marle, Jaap. 1980. The stress pattern of Dutch simplex words. A first approximation. Studies in Dutch phonol-
  ogy, ed. by Wim Zonneveld, Frans van Coetsem and O. W. Robinson, 79–121. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Martin, W. 1968. De verdoffing van gedekte en ongedekte e in niethoofd-tonige positie bij Romaanse leenwoor-
  den in het Nederlands. De Nieuwe Taalgids 61. 162–81.
McCarthy, John. 1979. On stress and syllabification. Linguistic Inquiry 10. 443–66.
Neijt, Anneke, and Wim Zonneveld. 1982. Metrische fonologie. De representatie van klemtoon in Nederlandse
  monomorfematische woorden. De Nieuwe Taalgids 75. 527–47.
Nouveau, Dominique. 1994. Language acquisition, metrical theory, and optimality. A study of Dutch word stress.
  Utrecht University: PhD dissertation.
van Oostendorp, Marc. 1995. Vowel quality and syllable projection. Tilburg University: PhD dissertation.
——. 1997. Lexicale variatie in de optimaliteitstheorie. Nederlandse Taalkunde 1997. 13–145.


ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
358 Marc van Oostendorp

——. 2000. Phonological projection. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Rietveld, Toni, Joop Kerkhoff, and Carlos Gussenhoven. 2004. Word prosodic structure and vowel duration in
  Dutch. Journal of Phonetics 32. 349–71.
Ross, John R. 1972. A reanalysis of English word stress. Contributions to generative phonology, ed. by M. Brame,
  231–45. Austin and London: University of Texas Press.
Trommelen, Mieke. 1983. The syllable in Dutch. With special reference to diminutive formation. Dordrecht:
  Foris.
——. 1989. Lettergreepstructuur en woordcategorie. De Nieuwe Taalgids 82. 64–77.
——. 1991. Dutch word stress. Extrametricality and feet. The Berkeley Conference on Dutch Linguistics 1989.
  Issues and Controversie, ed. by T. F. Shannon and J. P. Snapper, 157–73. Lanhan: University Press of America.
——, and Wim Zonneveld. 1989. Klemtoon en metrische fonologie. Muiderberg: Coutinho.
——, and ——. 1999. Word stress in English and Dutch. Word prosodic systems of the languages of Europe, ed.
  by H. van der Hulst, 132–3. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Van der Hulst, Harry. 1984. Syllable structure and stress in Dutch. Leiden University: PhD Dissertation.
Visch, Ellis. 1989. The rhythm rule in English and Dutch. Utrecht: Proefschrift.
——, and René Kager. 1984. Syllable-weight and Dutch word stress. Linguistics in the Netherlands, ed. by Hans
  Bennis and Wus van Lessen Kloeke, 231. Dordrecht: Foris.
Visser, Willem. 1997. The syllable in frisian. The Hague: Holland Academic Graphics.
Wiese, Richard. 2000. The phonology of German. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zonneveld, Ron van. 1982. Met de ritmische hangmat in de metrische boom. Tabu 12. 65–85.
——. 1984. Word rhythm and the Janus syllable. The structure of phonological representations II, ed. by Harry
  van der Hulst and Norval Smith, 133–40. Dordrecht: Dordrecht-Foris.
Zonneveld, Wim. 1993. Schwa, superheavies, stress and syllables in Dutch. The Linguistic Review 10. 61–110.
——. 2003. Zijn er op vooruit gegaan in de fonologie? Fonologische kruispunten. Studies op het gebied van de
  Nederlandse taalkunde, ed. by Georges de Schutter and Steven Gillis, 24. Gent: KANTL.




ª 2012 The Author                                                  Language and Linguistics Compass 6/6 (2012): 343–358, 10.1002/lnc3.339
Language and Linguistics Compass ª 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
