Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
(KNAW)


Loanwords in Dutch
van der Sijs, N.



published in
Loanwords in the World’s Languages: A Comparative Handbook, ed. Haspelmath, Martin & Tadmor, Uri
2009




document version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record




Link to publication in KNAW Research Portal




citation for published version (APA)
van der Sijs, N. (2009). Loanwords in Dutch. In M. Haspelmath, & U. Tadmor (Eds.), Loanwords in the World’s
Languages: A Comparative Handbook, ed. Haspelmath, Martin & Tadmor, Uri (pp. 338-359). De Gruyter
Mouton.




General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

       • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the KNAW public portal for the purpose of private study or
research.
       • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain.
       • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the KNAW public portal.

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.


E-mail address:
pure@knaw.nl




Download date: 25. Aug. 2026
Loanwords in the
World's Languages
A Comparative Handbook

Edited by
Martin Haspelmath
Uri Tadmor




De Gruyter Mouton
De Gruyter Mouton (formerly Mouton, The Hague)
is a Division of Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin.




© Printed on acid-free paper which falls within the guidelines
  of the ANSI to ensure permanence and durability.




Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

   Loanwords in the world 's languages : a comparative handbook / edited
   by Martin Haspelmath, Uri Tadmor.
        p. cm.
     Includes bibliographical references and index.
     ISBN 978-3-11-021843-5 (cloth : alk paper)
     1. Language and languages - Foreign words and phrases. I. Haspel-
   math, Martin, 1963 — II. Tadmor, Uri, 1960-
     P324.L63 2009
     412-dc22
                                                            2009045067



ISBN 978-3-11-021843-5

Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available in the Internet at http://dnb.d-nb.de.


© Copyright 2009 by Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, 10785 Berlin, Germany.
All rights reserved, including those of translation into foreign languages. No part of this book
may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writ-
ing from the publisher.
Cover design: Martin Zech, Bremen.
Printed in Germany.
Table of contents

Notational conventions                                                 ix
Acknowledgments                                                         x
List of authors                                                        xi


                             GENERAL CHAPTERS

I.    The Loanword Typology project and the World Loanword Database
      Martin Haspelmath and Uri Tadmor                                 1


II.   Lexical borrowing: Concepts and issues
      Martin Haspelmath                                               35

III. Loanwords in the world's languages: Findings and results
      Uri Tadmor                                                      55


                               THE LANGUAGES

1.    Loanwords in Swahili
      Thilo C. Schadeberg                                             76

2.    Loanwords in Iraqw, a Cushitic language of Tanzania
      Maarten Mous and Martha Qprro                                   103


3.    Loanwords in Gawwada, a Cushitic language of Ethiopia
      Mauro Tosco                                                     124

4.    Loanwords in Hausa, a Chadic language in West Africa
      AriAwagana and H. Ekkehard Wolff, with Doris Löhr               142

5.    Loanwords in Kanuri, a Saharan language
      Doris Löhr and H. Ekkehard Wolff, with Ari Awagana              166
 Table of contents


Loanwords in Tarifiyt, a Berber language of Morocco
Maarten Kossmann                                                  191

Loanwords in Seychelles Creole
Susanne Michaelis with Marcel Rosalie                             215

Loanwords in Romanian
Kim Schulte                                                       230

Loanwords in Selice Romani, an Indo-Aryan language of Slovakia
Viktor Elsik                                                      260

Loanwords in Lower Sorbian, a Slavic language of Germany
Hauke Bartels                                                     304

Loanwords in Old High German
Roland Schuhmann                                                  330

Loanwords in Dutch
Nicoline van der Sijs                                             338

Loanwords in British English
Anthony Grant                                                     360

Loanwords in Kildin Saami, a Uralic language of northern Europe
Michael Riefler                                                   384

Loanwords in Bezhta, a Nakh-Daghestanian of the North Caucasus
Bernard Comrie and Madzhid Khalilov                               414

Loanwords in Archi, a Nakh-Daghestanian of the North Caucasus
Marina Chumakina                                                  430

Loanwords in Manange, a Tibeto-Burman language of Nepal
Kristine A. Hildebrandt                                           447
Chapter 12

Loanwords in Dutch
Nicoline van der Sijs


1.     T h e language and its speakers                                                       *M

1.1.    The history of Dutch

Dutch is a West Germanic language, related to English, High German, Low Ger-
man and Frisian, and, less directly, to the North Germanic languages Danish,
Faroese, Icelandic, Norwegian and Swedish. Germanic belongs to the Indo-
European language family, to which most of the languages belong that are current:
spoken in Europe, as well as many languages of southwestern and southern Asia.
    The Dutch language originated after the Germanic migrations of the fifth cen-
tury. T h e language boundary between Germanic and Romance, which in tli
northwest runs straight across Belgium, originated in the eighth century - it ha
witnessed a few modifications in the course of time, but has not been drasticali
changed since the fourteenth century. Around this boundary we find bilingualism.
    In the sixth century the first written texts appear in the Low Countries (i.e. tlv
area of present-day Belgium and the Netherlands). In the Middle Ages varioi:
Dutch dialects were spoken here, which can be subdivided into the followii:.
groups: Hollands, Zealands, Flemish, Brabants, Limburgs and (Low) Saxon. The
Low Saxon dialects were and are spoken in the north-east of the Netherlands -
they are closely related to the Low German dialects spoken in the neighboring parts
of Germany. There is, therefore, no language boundary - the dialects shaded off
into each other gradually. However, there has been, since 1648, a political boundary
between the Netherlands and Germany. In the course of the twentieth century,
especially since the period between the two World Wars, the state boundary be-
tween Germany and the Netherlands has more and more come to be regarded as a
culture boundary and a language boundary; the transitional nature of the border
dialects has gradually been lost under the ever-increasing influence of the standard
languages Dutch and German.


                                                                                               *

 The subdatabase of the World Loanword Database that accompanies this chapter is available online
 at http://wold.livingsources.org. It is a separate electronic publication that should be cited as: van
 der Sijs, Nicoline. 2009. Dutch vocabulary. In Haspelmath, Martin & Tadmor, Uri (eds.) W<
 Loanword Database. Munich: Max Planck Digital Library, 1513 entries.
 <http://wold.livingsources.org/vocabulary/12>

                                                                                               I
                                                       12. Loanwords in Dutch    339




Map 1: Dutch and neighboring languages

In the northern part of the Netherlands, another language, Frisian, has from the
days of yore been spoken as well. During the Middle Ages, Frisian was spoken in
large areas outside the modern province of Friesland: Frisians were to be found in
North Holland, Groningen and Northern Germany, even in Zealand and Flanders.
But already after about 700, Frisian was pushed back farther and farther, and after
the Middle Ages, the area and the political power of the Frisians were ever more
reduced. In our days, Frisian is spoken only in a small part of the Northern Nether-
lands and North-West Germany.
340   Nicoline van der Sijs

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, there began to be felt, as a result of the
great social, political, economic and religious changes that took place in the Renais-
sance (among other things, the introduction of Protestantism), a need for a
standard language with which the inhabitants of the entire Dutch-speaking area
could more easily communicate with each other and in which bibles and other
Dutch books could be printed. It is therefore in this period that the foundation was
laid for a Standard Dutch. T h e standard language was formed in the Republic of
the United Provinces, more specifically in Holland. Standard Dutch is thus founded
on the (cultivated) dialect of Holland (cf. van der Sijs (2004) on the origins of
Standard Dutch).
    While the citizens of the Republic had enjoyed political freedom since the 17
century (officially since 1648), those of the Southern Netherlands (i.e. more or less
present-day Belgium) had foreign rulers: they came under Spanish, Austrian or
French governments. Because of this foreign domination, there was in the South
hardly any freedom for people to develop their own language. Latin, the language of
scholars and of reviving Catholicism, and French, the language of government and
culture, were dominant in the South. What was preserved, though, was the aware- '"
ness of cultural ties and linguistic links with the Northern Netherlands (i.e. the j
present-day Netherlands) - Dutch remained in Flanders and Brabant as the lan-
guage of lower-level government, and the vernacular was dialectal Dutch. Not
before 1750 do we encounter large-scale frenchification, although the higher classes
kept using Dutch side by side with French. From that moment on, however, the
social pressure to use French was very great.
    This reached its culmination point in the French Period (1792-1813), when-
unlike what we find in the Netherlands - legislation, jurisdiction and government
administration could be conducted only in French, and Dutch newspapers were
banned or had to be provided with a French translation (cf. Willemyns 2003). The
number of French loanwords and gallicisms, constructions translated literally from
French, has therefore always been larger in the Southern Netherlands than in the
North - and that is still the case nowadays.
    After the expulsion of the French, the Northern and Southern Netherlands were
combined in 1815 to form the Kingdom of the Netherlands under William I. He
proclaimed Dutch the national language and the administrative language of the
kingdom, with the motto: one country, one language. In the South, there was a
good deal of opposition against Dutch among the French-speaking aristocracy, and
among the Roman Catholic clergy who regarded Dutch as 'the devil's language', i.e.
the language of Protestantism. In 1830, Belgium seceded from the Netherlands, and
that was partly due to William's language regulations.
    After the secession, it was stipulated in the Belgian constitution of 1831 that the
use of French and Dutch was free - in actual practice this implied that French was
favored, in spite of the fact that there was a Dutch-speaking majority of 2.300,000 ,
as compared with 1.200,000 speakers of French. Most of the inhabitants did speak a !
Dutch dialect, but not Standard Dutch, while the upper classes spoke French. Gov-
ernment and jurisdiction were conducted in French, and the Government favoreéfl
                                                        12. Loanwords in Dutch     341

French, among others by appointing French-speaking civil servants exclusively.
There then followed a long period in which the position of Dutch was gradually
strengthened. After the secession a discussion was started in Belgium as to whether
a separate Flemish standard should be developed, or whether a connection should
be sought with the standard language of the Netherlands. From the middle of the
nineteenth century, most of the Belgians preferred the latter option.
   In the nineteenth century, the first official spelling guides and grammars of
Dutch began to appear. In the Netherlands, more and more people wrote in the
standard language. T h e spoken language, however, kept showing differences from
region to region. In the first half of the twentieth century, everybody received basic
schooling - in 1900, compulsory education was introduced in the Netherlands, in
1914 in Belgium - and many pupils followed some form of secondary education.
Thanks to increased mobility, industrialization and new means of communication
such as telephone, radio and television, the written and spoken standard language
came to be widely used. In Belgium, this spread started later, from the sixties of the
twentieth century. Whereas in the early years of the twentieth century only the
upper classes spoke Standard Dutch, three per cent of the Dutch population at
most, in our days at least eighty per cent of the population of the Netherlands uses
the standard language, and as much as fifty per cent in Belgium.
             .r

1.2.   The current position of Dutch

In a language survey conducted in 2005 by the Dutch Taalunie, the findings were:
Dutch is the native language of over 22 million people, mainly in the Netherlands
(16 million) and in Belgium (a good 6 million). In the Netherlands, Sranan (with
ca. 200,000 speakers), Turkish (192,000), Moroccan Arabic (100,000), Papiamento
(80,000), and Indonesian (45,000) are the main minority languages. In Belgium,
people with an Italian background form the largest group (280,000) among the
speakers of the languages of immigrants. In addition, there are about 105,000 peo-
ple with a Moroccan Arabic background, about 80,000 Portuguese and around
63,000 Turkish speakers. Of the territories outside Europe where Dutch used to be
spoken, such as Indonesia, only Suriname and the Dutch Antilles and Aruba have
remained. On the Dutch Antilles and Aruba, with about 300,000 inhabitants,
Dutch is the official language. On the islands of Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao,
Papiamento is the colloquial language, while on the small islands of St. Eustace,
Saba and St. Martin it is creole English. Since 2007, the two colloquial languages,
Papiamento and English, have been recognized as official languages on the Antilles,
next to Dutch. In Suriname, more than 20 languages are spoken; the official lan-
guage is Dutch. Sranan functions as the contact language between population
groups.
    Standard Dutch at this moment shows a high degree of homogeneity. However,
since the seventies of the twentieth century the norm for the standard language has
been widened: in the seventies the language use was democratized, along with
342    Nicoline van der Sijs

society. Language phenomena that till then were used only by the lower classes
became widely accepted, the tolerance for differences in pronunciation, wording and
dialectal variation increased, and the language became more informal.
    Standard Dutch nowadays knows regional differences. Thus, there are differ-
ences between Dutch-Dutch and Belgian-Dutch - these arose because
standardization was started so much later in Belgium. These differences become
smaller, however, except in the pronunciation - there the two forms of the lan-
guage are growing more and more apart. Language variation is much greater in
Belgium than in the Netherlands. In Belgium, the standard language is used by
fewer people than in the Netherlands, and it is more difficult for them to attain it.
As a result, an inter-language was created between the dialects and the standard
language, functioning as an informal, supra-regional colloquial language. This
inter-language contains, among others, all kinds of French loanwords, and con-
structions that have been translated literally from French, gallicisms, which are not
recognized in Standard Dutch. T h e distance between the inter-language and the
standard language in Belgium is much greater than that between informal Dutch
and the standard language in the Netherlands. T h e result is that the informal varie-
ties in the Netherlands and Belgium show considerable differences. They keep,
moreover, growing apart because the use of the inter-language in Belgium is on the
increase, and an autonomous standardization is taking place among the inter-
language variants. In the nineties of the twentieth century, more appreciation began
to be shown for the individual characteristics of refined Dutch, with the realization
that standard languages can have 'national varieties': languages may be used as stan-
dard language in several countries and still to a certain degree be different -
compare German in Austria, Switzerland and Germany.
    In Suriname and to a lesser degree on the Antilles, special varieties of Dutch
have come into being, Suriname and Antillian Dutch. These ethnolects show de-
viations from Standard Dutch in pronunciation, word formation, vocabulary and
grammar.
    There are also sociolinguistic differences. The dialects in the Netherlands,
which are losing ever more ground, count mostly as sociolects, being spoken only
by certain classes. In Belgium and in the southern Dutch regions of Brabant and
Limburg, the dialects are stronger, being spoken by a large part of the population:
these, then, are not the sociolect of a certain class - but the use of this dialect does
tend to decrease.
     In the Netherlands and Belgium, new language varieties have arisen due to
post-war immigration - so-called ethnic Dutch, the Dutch spoken by people with a
different ethnic background and another or a second native language, such as
Turkish, Moroccan Arabic, Berber, Papiamento, Kurdish or a language from
Suriname (cf. van der Sijs ed. 2005). T h e varieties show some phonological, gram-
matical and lexical differences in which they deviate from Standard Dutch. Some of
the elements of this ethnic Dutch are adopted by speakers of Dutch (only) as their
native language, notable by young people. This has promoted the rise of the so-
called street language, the group lingo of young people with mixed backgrounds in
                                                             12. Loanwords in Dutch     343

     the larger cities, a mixed language with Dutch as its basis, with an admixture of
     more or less adapted or modified words from other languages (English, Turkish,
     Arabic, Papiamento etc.) and new, made-up words. In Belgium, this young people's
     lingo is called General Cites, it shows influences of especially Italian, Greek, Span-
     ish, Moroccan Arabic and Turkish. T h e phenomenon is transient, as appears from
     recent investigations, and for the time being, ethnic varieties have no influence on
     Standard Dutch, apart from the odd loanword.
         Thanks to globalization, English, the internationally used language of commu-
     nication, is making its influence on Dutch felt, in two ways. In the first place,
     English loanwords are adopted, secondly, English is replacing Dutch in some do-
     mains as the language of communication, notably in higher education and in
     internationally oriented industrial circles. This is regarded as a threat to the posi-
     tion of Dutch by some, fearing that their language might disappear in the near or
     distant future, but this fear is as yet not very realistic. While the Dutch government
     is stimulating the use of English in higher education, the Flemish government is
     trying to curtail it by restricting the number of English courses available to twenty
    per cent of the curriculum.
         Until recently, there were no provisions in the constitution about Dutch in the
     Netherlands. A number of agreements were recorded about the use of Frisian (spo-
     ken in the province of Friesland) in public government, jurisdiction and in schools.
    The Fourth Cabinet of Premier Balkenende, however, published a coalition agree-
    ment early 2007, in which for the first time the use of Dutch was regulated: "The
    Government promotes the simple and careful use of Dutch as language of govern-
    ment, culture, and conversation, embedding it as such in the Constitution, without



I   detriment to the recognition by law of (the use of) the Frisian language." In Bel-
    gium, thanks to the long-standing language conflict between Dutch and French,
    there have long since been agreements about the use of languages. From 1993, it
    has been ordained in the Constitution that Belgium is a federal state, comprising a
    Flemish, a French and a German-speaking Community, a Flemish, a Walloon and a
    Brussels region, and four language districts. T h e Constitution stipulates that in
    Flanders, Standard Dutch is to be used in three domains of social life: education,
    government and jurisdiction; the use of language in all other situations is part of
    the private sector and is free. Around sixty per cent of the Belgian population
    speaks Dutch in everyday life.
        In 1980, the Dutch and Belgian governments founded the Dutch Language Un-
    ion (Nederlandse Taalunie), with as its aim "the integration of the Netherlands and
    the Dutch community in Belgium with regard to language and literature in the
    widest sense". Surinam joined in 2003 as associate member.



    2. Sources of data

    The Dutch vocabulary and the etymology of its words have been adequately de-
    scribed. The most important descriptive historical dictionaries are the
344   Nicotine van der Sijs

Oudnederlands Woordenboek (ONW, since 2009 on the internet: inl.onw.nl), dealing
with the Dutch vocabulary up to the 13 century, the Vroegmiddelnederlands Woor-
denboek (VMNW), dealing with the Dutch vocabulary of the 13* century, the
Middelnederlandse}} Woordenboek (MNW), containing, roughly, a description of
Dutch up to 1500, and the Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal (WNT), dealing,
together with 3 volumes of Aanvullingen [Supplements], with Dutch from circa
1500 to 1976. Since 2007, this dictionary can be consulted on-line. Another valu-
able aid is the Cd-rom Middelnederlands, which contains not only the MNW, but
also most of the Old Dutch and Early Middle Dutch texts, i.e. texts from before
1300.
    In the historical dictionaries of Dutch, brief etymologies are given for most
words, but sometimes this information is now obsolete. However, there are quite a
few etymological dictionaries of Dutch. In 1892, the German linguist Franck edited
an Etymologisch woordenboek der Nederlandsche taal, which was, more than anything
else, an adaptation of the German etymological dictionary by Kluge, which had
come out nine years before. Franck's dictionary acquired its value through the revi-
sion by Slavist van Wijk in 1912 and the supplement, added in 1936, by
Netherlandist van Haeringen. In 1958, a concise Etymologisch Woordenboek by Jan
de Vries was published in the Prisma paperback series - of which new editions ap-
pear regularly; the last set of editions have been edited by former W N T editor De
Tollenaere. 1971 saw the publication of Jan de Vries' Nederlands Etymologisch
Woordenboek. In 1989, van Veen and van der Sijs published their Etymologisch
Woordenboek (EWE) with van Dale - a second edition of this appeared in 1997; in
this dictionary, containing many more entries than all its predecessors, attention is
paid for the first time to more recent loanwords - the earlier etymological diction-
aries all concentrate mainly on original native words and early loans. Since 2003, a
new etymological dictionary has been appearing, in which the most recent views on
etymology are being incorporated, the Etymologisch woordenboek van het Nederlands
(EWN); the fourth and last volume has been planned for the end of 2009.
    In the past, a number of scholarly books and articles appeared on Dutch loan-
words borrowed from specific languages, such as the Dutch loanwords from French
(by Salverda de Grave, 1906), from German (by Theisse, 1975, and de Vooys, 1946),
English (de Vooys, 1951) and Latin (van der Sijs & Engelsman 2000). In 1996, a
survey of the influence of all other languages on Dutch, appeared: the
Leenwoordenboek (van der Sijs) - a revised second edition was published in 2005.
    Attention has been paid for some decades to the dating of first appearances of
Dutch words. In his revisions of the Prisma pocket dictionary de Tollenaere started
systematically adding more or less exact dates, but the number of words that were
dated remained limited to a few thousand. In van Dale's Etymologisch Woordenboek
(1997), for the first time, all entries (over 30,000) were provided with a date for
their first occurrence in a written document. An elaboration of the datings is to be
found in the Chronologisch woordenboek (van der Sijs 2001). In the EWN, of which
three volumes have appeared in the middle of 2009, the datings are further elabo-
rated. T h e datings of the words in the subdatabase are based largely on the
                                                         12. Loanwords in Dutch     345

information from the EWB and van der Sijs (2001). Most of the dates supplied in
these works come from quotations in the three great historical dictionaries of
Dutch, the W N T , MNW and VMNW. Few documents exist from the period up to
the thirteenth century, and dates from that period invariably represent lucky finds.
In the case of many native words we know that they must have existed at the time,
but it is only from the 13 century onwards that we have an adequate number of
documents. Even so, dates found in other periods, too, are always more or less rela-
tive and accidental. No date can be said to be absolute, and every year given is to be
regarded as an indication for a period. And it is 'work in progress': these days, ever
more sources become available digitally, enabling us to find ever more accurate and
earlier locations of words. Nevertheless, the data supplied give an indication of the
period since when, roughly, a word has been found in Dutch.



3. Contact situations

There is at this moment a discussion going on about the extent and the nature of
substratum influence on Germanic. Since there is no consensus on this subject yet,
I have not taken it into account. This has meant that I have counted Germanic
words, including those that may come from a substratum language, among the
native words. It has, for example, been suggested that the words avond 'evening',
baas 'boss', bast 'bark', been 'leg' and beuk 'beech' go back to a substratum language.
   The loanwords can be divided into two groups: first, the words that were bor-
rowed in the Germanic period and from there turned up in Dutch, and secondly,
the words that were borrowed after the breakup of the West Germanic unity, i.e.
from about the sixth century CE. I will describe the contact situations for both
groups in roughly chronological order.


3.1.   Loanwords in Germanic

3.1.1. Akkadian influence on Germanic

The earliest known influence on Germanic concerns the trade term zilver 'silver'
from Akkadian.


3.1.2. Celtic influence on Germanic

During the period after the disintegration of Indo-European into various subdivi-
sions, Germanic borrowed a number of words from neighboring Celtic languages.
In the case of the words bok 'he-goat' and eed 'oath', there is some discussion as to
the direction in which the influence took place: from Celtic to Germanic or the
other way round. T h e problem does not arise in the case of the words ijzer 'iron',
346      Nicoline van der Sijs

lood 'lead' and rijk 'rich', because it is certain that the Celts, earlier than the Ger-
manic tribes, were involved in beating iron and founding empires.


3.1.3.     Old Slavic influence on Germanic                                            j

Germanic borrowed one word from Old Slavic: rogge 'rye'. Rye is a valuable plant,
which was unknown to the Germanic tribes; it spread, together with its name, from
the Russian plains to the West.


3.1.4.    Latin influence on Germanic

In 57 BCE, Caesar conquered Northern Gaul, and from that moment the southern
part of the Low Countries was occupied by the Romans. This situation lasted till
about 400 CE, when the Rhine army was called back for the defense of Italy. The
Romans, then, were in the Low Countries for nearly five centuries. The Rhine was
the official boundary of the Roman Empire. T h e Romans brought the Germanic
tribes into contact with all sorts of technical novelties, for which the Germans usu-
ally took over the Latin names. Thus, the Germans learned to build brick houses,
they adopted the Roman calendar, they became familiar with new foodstuffs and
new ways to prepare them, and they traded with the Romans, using, for the first
time, coins as currency (before that time, trade articles were bartered). From Table
3 below, it appears that the number of Latin loanwords in the semanticfieldsFood
and drink and The house is considerable. Only the influence on the calendar does
not appear from the data under category Time of the Loanword Typology meaning
list, because we are dealing especially with loan translations here: thus, all the
names of the days of the week except zaterdag 'Saturday' are translations of Latin
names. All these Latin loans were found in Dutch in the Middle Ages - they were
borrowed in oral contact with the Romans.


3.1.5.     Church Latin influence

T h e Christianization of the Germanic peoples (with the exception of the Goths)
dates from the period after the Roman Age, but it started already before West
Germanic had finally fallen apart. Christianity and the knowledge of the Bible -
including a number of till then unknown animals and plants mentioned there - was
propagated together with Church Latin; many early religious terms can, therefore,
be traced back to Latin. These words were generally adopted during the Middle
Ages and they are usually dated before the 14£ century. The influence of Church
Latin then went on making itself felt for many centuries. The monasteries pro-
moted the culture of writing - consequently, many words in that area, too, come
from Church Latin.
                                                          12. Loanwords in Dutch     347

3.1.6. Religious Greek influence on Germanic

Most of the Christian religious terms are taken from Church Latin, but one term
has been borrowed direct from Greek: kerk 'church'.


3.1.7. Romance influence on Germanic

A few words - pijp 'pipe', pot 'pot', zijde 'silk' - were borrowed at a later time from a
Romance vernacular rather than from the Latin of antiquity, i.e. in the period be-
tween the fifth and the ninth century.


3.2.   Loanwords in Dutch

3.2.1. Old English influence

There is one word that may or may not have come from Old English: boot 'boat'.


3.2.2. Old Frisian influence

There is one word that, because of its form, must come from Old Frisian: eiland
'island', reflecting the strong position Frisian held in the Middle Ages.


3.2.3. Old Irish influence

Irish missionaries christianizing the Low Countries in the seventh century left one
Irish loanword behind: klok 'clock'.


3.2.4. Old Norse maritime influence

Through the fishing trade, Dutch native speakers towards the end of the Middle
Ages came into contact with speakers of Old Norse, and learned, among others, the
words nf'reef and haai 'shark'.


3.2.5. French cultural influence

As a neighboring language of Dutch from the earliest known times until today,
French has had a great influence on the Dutch language, although in the 20 cen-
tury that influence has markedly decreased in favor of English. That influence was
not only felt in the Netherlands: for centuries France had set the tone in most of
Europe in the fields of culture, fashion, nutrition, art, music and technology. Table
3 shows in what fields France has had the greatest influence on Dutch.
348      Nicoline van der Sijs

3.2.6.    Picardic oral influence

French influence was effectuated through spoken contacts as well as through writ-
ten works. T h e French variety spoken in northern France, Picardic, also influenced
Dutch through oral contact among speakers living along the boundary between the
Dutch and French/Picardic-speaking areas.


3.2.7.    High German influence

T h e position of German is comparable to that of French: As a neighboring lan-
guage, German has exerted its influence on Dutch since early on and until the
middle of the 19 century, though much less strongly than French, because in the
past France had a much greater cultural and political impact on the Low Countries
and all of Europe than Germany.


3.2.8.    Low German spoken loans

Some words were borrowed in oral contact between speakers of the, very similar,
Dutch and Low German dialects.


3.2.9.    Italian banking terms

During the 15' and 16c centuries, Italian bankers were very influential in the Low
Countries, and traces have been preserved in the language, such as the words bank
'bank' and nul 'zero'.


3.2.10. Colonial contacts

Portuguese and/or Spanish contacts

T h e Portuguese and the Spaniards made voyages of discovery to new continents,
even before the Dutch did - they got to know new animals and plants, of which
they usually took over the local names. They traded some of them to Western
Europe. In addition, from about 1600, the Dutch traveled to continents where
there were already Portuguese and Spanish settlers. As a result, in that period
Dutch took over various Portuguese and Spanish terms which derive from non-
European languages.

English colonial contacts

In the colonial period, from about 1600, there were, in the newly discovered terri-
tories and continents, contacts between English and Dutch. English had taken over
a number of words from indigenous languages, and subsequently Dutch came to
                                                            12. Loanwords in Dutch    349

i   know these words from the English, partly in the colonies, partly after the English
    had brought these words to Europe. These words were borrowed between the 17
    and 19 centuries, the word banyan even more recently, in the 20 century.

,   Trade contacts in colonial times

    From 1600, Dutch colonists settled in Asian territories - they traded with countries
    in Asia and the Middle East. They took over terms for the products of their trade
    from the languages spoken there.


    3.2.11. English/American global influence

    From the middle of the 19t century, Great Britain and the United States gained
    more and more political, cultural and technological influence on the rest of the
    world. During this period, Dutch, like other languages, borrowed various interna-
    tional terms.


    3.2.12. Medical and scientific Latin influence

    During the Middle Ages and until well into the 19 century, in Europe Latin was
    the international scientific and scholarly language in which, among others, medical
    works were written. This Latin was a written language, it was even spoken by
    scholars, but it was nobody's native language. Scientific Latin differed in details
    from classical Latin, and a host of new words were formed in it for new discoveries
    and inventions. Through the contacts between scientists and doctors on the one
    hand and laymen on the other, many Latin terms were introduced into Dutch. In
    this context, we should also mention the various loan translations that have found
    their way into the language: because the Latin word could not be understood by
    everyone, literal translations into Dutch were made - hence words like noorderlicht
    'arctic lights', duizendpoot 'centipede', baarmoeder 'womb', ruggengraat 'spine',
    sleutelbeen 'collarbone' and vaderland 'native country'.



    4. Numbers and types of loanwords

    The Dutch subdatabase contains 1513 words, of which 289 are certain loans, 8
    dubious loans and 28 loan translations. This means that the number of loanwords
    is about 20%, more exactly: the influence of foreign languages lies between 19.5%
    and 21.5%.
        Which languages had a substantial influence on Dutch? Merely French, Latin,
    German and English fall into this category (and only the certain loans are counted
    here). The influence of French, in which I will include that of Romance (an earlier
    phase of French) and Picardic (a northern French dialect), can be set at 36.7% of all
350    Nicoline van der Sijs

loanwords. T h e Latin loanwords (from Roman times, from Church Latin and from
medical and scientific Latin) amount to 32.2% of all loanwords, the German ones \
(High and Low German together) 14.2% and English loans, finally, 7.6%. None of
the other languages supplied more than 3 % , most of them 1% or less.
   Table 1 gives a survey of the loanwords subdivided as to language and semantic
word class.
Table 1:                                                                                     j
Loanwords in Dutch by donor language and semantic word class (percentages)

                                     I               §          I                      1
                                     i—*             o   <"     c           ~Q          (5
                                                               —
                    JS               o 3        -S       2P                 o    _     9

                     £          3    ao         woja           u     O H . 5           z
Nouns              9.5
                    '.5        8.4    3.2      2.2   1.7      0.3   1.0   26.3       73.7
Verbs              2.3         3.2    1.7      0.3       -      -     -    7.5       92.5
Adjectives         4.0         2.4    3.2        -       -    0.8     -   10.4       89.6
Adverbs              -           -   20.0        -       -      -     -   20.0       80.0
Function words     1.0           -         -     -   1.0        -     -    2.1       97.9
all words          6.8         6.1     2.7     1.5   1.1      0.3   0.6   19.1       80.9


T h e conclusion is clear: the loans are mostly nouns, and this goes for the loans
from all the languages. Although nouns form by far the largest word class in all
languages and it should therefore not surprise us that they are borrowed most, it
appears that also the relative number of borrowed nouns exceeds the other word
classes: of the nouns, 26% are loanwords, whereas for all other classes the percent-
age is lower. The figures for the adverbs in Table 1 are misleading: in the
subdatabase there are five adverbs in all, of which just one is a loanword - in such a
small database that means as much as twenty per cent.
    Some years ago, I looked into the relation native words versus loanwords in
Dutch (van der Sijs 1998: 158-188). It is interesting to place those data beside the
information from the Loanword Typology meaning list. The Etymologisch
Woordenboek (EWB) contains 25.1% native words, 73.9% loanwords and 1% other
words (words whose origin is unknown, letter words, etc.). Now, the entries in this
dictionary were selected from an etymological point of view, which means that on
the whole, only non-compound and non-derived words were included; this of
course influences the outcome.
    I also calculated the percentage of loanwords of the word types occurring in an
average Dutch newspaper text. T h e number of loanwords in the newspaper text was
30.7%. These loanwords I categorized on the basis of language of origin. For com-
parison I give the percentages from the EWB. T h e loanwords from the Romance
languages (especially French and Latin) were taken together, as in these cases one
cannot always tell for certain what the source language was.
                                                        12. Loanwords in Dutch     351

Table 2:      Percentage of loanwords in a newspaper text and in an etymological
              dictionary (EWB)
                            % of loanwords                    % of all words

                         Newspaper            EWB         Newspaper              EWB
Romance                        82.1             68.6            25.2              50.7
English                         7.4             10.3             2.3               7.6
German                          6.8              6.2             2.1               4.6
Other                           3.7             14.9             1.1              11.0
Total                         100.0            100.0            30.7              73.9
Native/rest                                                     69.3              26.1
Total                                                          100.0             100.0


In other words: in an etymological dictionary, 73.9% of the words are loans, in a
newspaper text 30.7% and in the Loanword Typology list 19.1%. T h e conclusion
is inevitable: although there are many loanwords in our dictionaries, only part of
them are actually used daily. T h e difference between the percentage of loanwords in
a Dutch newspaper text (30%) and that in the Loanword Typology list can no
doubt be accounted for because in a newspaper text we find reference being made to
modern developments, inventions, techniques etc., which are as a rule indicated by
a loanword. The Loanword Typology meaning list on the other hand contains
relatively many words of the so-called central vocabulary: words for man's everyday
environment - and such words are in Dutch more often native words than loan-
words.
    In Table 3, the percentages of native words and loanwords are subcategorized
into 24 semantic fields.
    I should add that the absolute numbers of words are really too small to make
definite statements about the influence of foreign languages in individual semantic
fields. Still, some details are striking: there are few loanwords in the fields of
Kinship, The body, Quantity, Sense perception, and Law. There are no borrowed
 function words at all - at any rate not among the entries of the subdatabase, al-
 though Dutch did borrow a few function words.
    More loanwords than average are to be found in the semantic fields Animals,
 Food and drink, The house and Agriculture and vegetation, but there are only two
 categories where the number of loanwords is really substantial: Religion and belief
 and Modern world. This need not surprise us: Christianity was spread together with
 Latin, and until today, Latin has played an important role in Roman Catholicism.
 And our modern world is internationally oriented - inventions are mostly made
 outside Dutch-speaking countries, and are then usually incorporated in the Low
 Countries with their foreign names. Another striking feature is that the influence
 of English may be called substantial only in the field Modern world - this reflects
 the great technological and cultural influence of Great Britain and the United
 States after World War II.
3DZ.     ïviconne van aer sijs

Table 3:
Loanwords in Dutch by donor language and semantic field (percentages)




                                                                                                                                              Total loanwords
                                                                                                                          Other languages
                                                                                                      Celtic languages
                                                                                     Other Romance




                                                                                                                                                                  Non- loanwords
                                                           High or Low




                                                                                     languages
                                                           German


                                                                           English
                                        French


                                                   Latin
  1 T h e physical world              15.2          -         2.5         1.3               -            -               2.5                21.5                78.5
  2 Kinship                            2.9        1.5         1.5         1.5               -            -                    -              7.4                92.6
  3 Animals                            9.9        4.1         2.5         3.3         4.1                -               0.8                24.7                75.3
  4 T h e body                         3.0        4.9         1.2         0.6               -            -                   -               9.7                90.3
  5 Food and drink                     6.2       15.4             -       1.2         1.2                -                   -              24.1                75.9
  6 Clothing and grooming             11.3        9.7         6.5           -         3.2                -                   -              30.6                69.4
  7    T h e house                     9.8       21.6         5.9           -         2.0                -                   -              39.2                60.8
  8    Agriculture and vegetation      6.3        9.5             -       3.8         6.3                -               2.5                28.5                71.5
  9    Basic actions and technology    2.4        3.7         1.2         1.2               -        2.4                 1.2                12.2                87.8
 10    Motion                          2.5        3.8         1.3        2.5           1.3               -                   -              11.4                88.6
 11 Possession                         2.1        8.3             -         -               -        2.1                     -              12.4                87.6
 12 Spatial relations                  5.1        5.1        2.5            -               -            -                   -              12.7                87.3
 13 Quantity                             -        2.6             -         -         2.6                -                   -               5.1                94.9
 14 Time                               7.8        3.1         1.6           -               -        1.6                     -              14.1                85.9
 15 Sense perception                   4.0          -             -         -               -            -                   -               4.0                 96
 16 Emotions and values                7.8        2.0         7.8           -               -            -                   -              17.6                82.4
 17 Cognition                          5.2        8.6         6.9           -               -            -                   -              20.7                79.3
 18 Speech and language                6.7        6.7         6.7           -               -            -                   -              20.2                79.8
 19 Social and political relations     4.8        4.8         9.6           -               -            -                   -              19.3                80.7
 20 Warfare and hunting                6.9        4.6         4.6           -               -            -                   -              16.1                83.9
 21 Law                                  -          -         3.8           -               -            -                   -               3.8                96.2
 22 Religion and belief                6.8       23.7         6.8           -               -            -               3.4                40.7                59.3
 23 Modern world                      29.3        8.6         1.7        13.8          1.7               -               3.4                58.6                41.4
 24 Miscellaneous function               -          -             -         -               -            -                   -               0.0                 100
    words
       all words                       6.8        6.1         2.7         1.5         1.1            0.3                 0.6                19.1                80.9



T h e influence of French, too, is strikingly great in the Modern world, more than ;
twice as great, even, as English. This is due to the French cultural influence on the !
Low Countries having been much more long-lasting than the English: from the
12 century onwards there has been French influence. In addition, French is repre-
sented impressively in The physical world - the flat Low Countries did not have ;
special words for phenomena like baai 'bay', grot 'cave', kaap 'cape', lagune 'lagoon',
oceaan 'ocean', rivier 'river' or vallei 'valley'. Finally, the share of French loanwords i
in Clothing and grooming is substantial, thanks to French fashion. Table 3 does not 1
show that the influence of French in the field Kinship is more than average - this is
because only loanwords and no loan translations were included, leaving out of con- ,
                                                          12. Loanwords in Dutch     353

sideration the fact that quite a few terms for members of the family were modeled
on French terms: grootvader 'grandfather', grootmoeder 'grandmother', grootouders
'grandparents', kleinkind 'grandchild', kleinzoon 'grandson', kleindochter 'granddaugh-
ter', schoonvader 'father-in-law', schoonmoeder 'mother-in-law', schoonzoon
'son-in-law', schoondochter 'daughter-in-law',         schoonouders 'parents-in-law',
schoonkind 'child-in-law', schoonbroer 'brother-in-law' and schoonzuster 'sister-in-law'.
    The influence of Latin is greatest in The house - which is not surprising, since
the Romans taught the Germans the technique of the building of brick houses -
and Religion and belief (sec above).
    From the data, no specific influence of German in specific semantic fields be-
comes apparent; the German influence spread fairly regularly over a large group of
word fields. The influence of other languages is too small for me to be able to make
pronouncements about them.



5. Integration of loanwords

Loanwords have always immediately been adapted to Dutch. T h e Latin loanwords
that were borrowed in the period of the Roman Empire and the words from
Church Latin were so thoroughly adapted that they are in no way recognizable as
loanwords, and only etymologists can determine their origin. On the other hand,
words from scholarly, scientific and medical Latin are usually recognizable in spell-
ing and pronunciation.
    French loanwords, too, have been adapted to Dutch, but because of the large
number of French loanwords, several loan phonemes have developed in Dutch, such
as the /zj/ in etage 'floor' or jaloezie 'envy' and the /sj/ in machine. Moreover, the
large influx of French loanwords has contributed to Dutch words getting a free
accent pattern, with the accent sometimes on the final syllable - in Germanic, the
accent was, in principle, always on the first syllable of the root.
    German loanwords are in general immediately changed to Dutch morpheme
shapes - thus, Fremdling 'stranger' is 'dutchified' to vreemdeling. T h e result is that
German loanwords are less easily recognizable as such than loanwords from other
languages.
    Finally, English loanwords, which are relatively young, have been adapted least
to Dutch - resulting in a discrepancy between spelling and pronunciation. Most
English loanwords retain the English spelling and pronunciation in Dutch: for
example, a is pronounced /a/ in Dutch words and in naturalized loanwords, but in
English loanwords it is ltd (baby) or Id (jaguar), two vowel sounds which have for
centuries had the spelling ee or e. There is a small group of Dutch speakers who are
opposed to English loanwords, which are easily recognized as such - this is not
likely to be successful, since earlier objections against German loanwords never
caused these to disappear.
    Because Dutch has always borrowed words from other languages, keeping at first
the spelling of the other languages intact, a problem has arisen with the spelling of
354    Nicoline van der Sijs

so-called bastard words, i.e. words borrowed from other languages (especially
                                                                                   f
French and Latin) that have not completely been integrated yet. Dutch has, for
instance, the letters c, q, x and y, which occur only in non-native words, it also has
a different spelling for various sounds. Thus, in native words and integrated loan-
words the sound /k/ is spelled k, but in bastard words as c (cf. the native vlakte 'the
plain' versus the loan word insect). At regular intervals, proposals are made for spell-
ing reforms, which invariably lead to a heated public debate. T h e greatest problems
there concern the bastard words.



6.    Grammatical borrowing

The influence of other languages on Dutch syntax is hard to establish, although it
is certain to have occurred in the present and in the past. Research in thisfieldis
ongoing, and scholars are not agreed on the question in how far language changes
occur autonomously or are/can be influenced in greater or smaller measure by other
languages. It is certain, for instance, that an expression like de heetste herfst ooit,
which was introduced recently to replace de allerheetste herfst, is a literal translation
of English the hottest autumn ever. It is also a fact that German and English had and
in part still have, a certain influence on Dutch word formation. These two related
Germanic languages have so many points of correspondence with Dutch that their
word formation patterns can be copied fairly easily. In the past, loan translations
were made from French and Latin, with the word formation of these languages
being copied; among the entries of the Loanword Typology list, too, we find such
loan translations (they are given at the end of the Loanword Appendix).
    Finally, French has for centuries influenced the Dutch of Belgium, notably the
inter-language and dialects, and to a lesser extent also the Belgian Dutch standard
language, not only in its vocabulary but also in its syntax. Such gallicisms are re-
jected in the standard language whenever possible, and they cause a great deal of
vexation. In 20th-century Belgium, many linguistic advisory books have been pub-
lished with the aim of resisting the influence of French.



7.    Conclusion

The greatest influence on Dutch came from neighboring French, and from Latin,
which had for a few centuries been spoken in the south of the Low Countries, and
has since then for centuries played a major role as the language of science and relig-
ion. After these two, the greatest influence has come from neighboring German and
English (in that order). In these days, the influence of English on Dutch is still on
the increase - the word material selected on the Loanword Typology meaning list
does not show this, however.
                                                             12. Loanwords in Dutch    355


Acknowledgment

I thank Piet Verhoeff for his translation of the text.



References

Cd-rom Middelnederlands [CD-ROM      Middle Dutch]. 1998. Den Haag/Antwerpen.
de Vooys, C. G. N. 1946. Duitse invloed op de Nederlandse woordvoorraad [German influence
    on the Dutch vocabulary]. (Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandsche Akademie
    van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Nieuwe Reeks 49.1). Amsterdam.
de Vooys, C. G. N. 1951. Engelse invloed op de Nederlandse woordvoorraad [English influence
    on the Dutch vocabulary]. (Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandsche Akademie
    van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Nieuwe Reeks 57.5). Amsterdam.
de Vries, J. 1971. Nederlands etymologisch woordenboek [Dutch etymological dictionary].
   Leiden.
de Vries, J. & de Tollenaere, F. 2000. Etymologisch woordenboek [Etymological dictionary].
    21l edn. Utrecht.
EWB: see van Veen, P. A. F. & van der Sijs, Nicoline 1997.
Franck, J. & van Wijk, N. & van Haeringen, C. B. 1976. Etymologisch woordenboek der
    Nederlandsche taal [Etymological dictionary of the Dutch language]. 's-Gravenhage.
MNW: see Verwijs, Eeko & Verdam, Jacob 1885-1929.
ONW: see Pijnenburg, W. J. J. 8c Schoonheim, T . H. & Louwen, K. & Moijaart, M. A. &
  Quak, A. 2009.
Philippa, M. & Debrabandere, F. & Quak, A. & Schoonheim, T . & van der Sijs, N. (eds.).
    2003-. Etymologisch woordenboek van het Nederlands: A- [Etymological dictionary of
     Dutch: A-]. Amsterdam.
Pijnenburg, W. J. J. & Schoonheim, T . H. & Louwen, K. & Moijaart, M. A. & Quak, A.
    2009. Oudnederlands woordenboek [Old Dutch dictionary], <http://onw.inl.nl/>.
Pijnenburg, W. J. J. & van Dalen-Oskam, K. H. & Depuydt, K. A. C. & Schoonheim, T .
    H. 2001. Vroegmiddelnederlands Woordenboek [Early Middle Dutch dictionary]. 4 vols.
    Leiden.
Salverda de Grave, J. J. 1906. De Franse woorden in het Nederlands [The french words in
    Dutch]. Amsterdam.
Theissen, S. 1975. De germanismen in de moderne Nederlandse woordenschat [The germanisms
   in the modern Dutch vocabulary]. Belgisch Interuniversitair Centrum voor
   Neerlandistiek.
van der Sijs, Nicoline (ed.). 2005. Wereldnederlands: Oude en jonge variëteiten van het
    Nederlands [World Dutch: Old and young varieties of Dutch]. Den Haag.
van der Sijs, Nicoline. 1998. Geleend en uitgeleend: Nederlandse woorden in andere talen &
    andersom [Lent and borrowed: Dutch words in other languages & vice versa]. Amsterdam.
356       Nicoline van der Sijs


van der Sijs, Nicoline. 2001. Chronologisch woordenboek: De ouderdom en herkomst van onze
    woorden en betekenissen [Chronological dictionary: The age and origin of our words and
    meanings]. Amsterdam: Veen.
van der Sijs, Nicoline. 2004. Taal als mensenwerk: Het ontstaan van het ABN [Language as a
    work of man: The development of High Dutch]. Den Haag: Sdu Uitgevers.
van der Sijs, Nicoline. 2005a. Van Dale Groot Leenwoordenboek: De invloed van andere talen
    op het Nederlands [Van Dale's comprehensive loanword dictionary: Toe influence of other
    languages on Dutch]. Utrecht/Antwerpen: Van Dale Lexicografie.
van der Sijs, Nicoline. 2005b. De geschiedenis van het Nederlands in een notendop [The history
    of Dutch in a nutshell], Amsterdam.
van der Sijs, Nicoline & Engelsman, Jaap. 2000. Nota bene: De invloed van het Latijn en
    Grieks op het Nederlands [Nota bene: The influence of Latin and Greek on Dutch]. Den
    Haag.
van der Sijs, Nicoline & Willemyns, Roland. 2009. Het verhaal van het Nederlands [The
    history of Dutch]. Amsterdam.
van Veen, P. A. F. & van der Sijs, Nicoline. 1997. Etymologisch woordenboek: De herkomst
    van onze woorden [Etymological dictionary: The origin of our words]. 2 edn.
    Utrecht/Antwerpen: Van Dale.
Verwijs, Eelco & Verdam, Jacob. 1885-1929. Middelnederlandsch Woordenboek [Middle
    Dutch dictionary]. 9 vols. Den Haag.
VMNW: see Pijnenburg, W. J. J. et al. 2001.
Willemyns, Roland. 2003. Het               verhaal van het Vlaams [The       history of Flemish],
    Utrecht/Antwerpen.
W N T . 1882-1998. Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal [Dictionary of the Dutch language
    3rd edn. of CD-ROM, 2003. <http://wnt.inl.nl/>. Den Haag/Leiden.



 Loanword Appendix
 A. LOANWORDS                       English                      boemerang       boomerang
                                                                 boot            boat (perhaps
                                    lucifer       match
 Akkadian                                                                         borrowed)
                                    baby          baby
                                                                 outrigger       outrigger
 zilver           silver            jaguar        jaguar
                                                                 peddel          paddle
                                    kangoeroe     kangaroo
 Celtic                                                          radio            radio
                                    alligator     alligator
                  he-goat(perhaps                                televisie       television
 bok
                   borrowed)        opossum       opossum
                                                                 auto            car
 ijzer            iron              seks hebben   to have sex
                                                                 bus             bus
 lood             lead              lunch         lunch
                                                                 wc              toilet
 rijk             rich              lasso         lasso
                                                                 plastic         plastic
 eed              oath (perhaps     banyan        banyan
                                                                 film             film/movie
                   borrowed)        yam           yam
                                                                 12. Loanwords in Dutch          357


trein        train              ceintuur       belt               harnas          armour
                                juweel         jewel              fee             fairy, elf
French
                                kraal          bead               moskee          mosque
vallei       valley             tent           tent               post (2)        post/mail
pot          cave               lamp           lamp or torch      krant           newspaper
baai         bay                kussen         pillow             telefoon        telephone
rivier       river, stream      rijst          rice               elektriciteit   electricity
vlam         flame              cassave        cassava/manioc     machine         machine
kalm         calm               maniok         cassava/manioc     injectie        injection
oceaan       ocean              kalebas        gourd              president       president
lagune       lagoon             pompoen        pumpkin, squash    minister        minister
kaap         cape               tapijt         rug                politie         police
savanne      savanna            rollen         to roll            toilet          toilet
tante        aunt               dansen         to dance           matras          mattress
familie      relatives          prijs          price              schroef         screw
beest        animal             plaats         place              sigaret         cigarette
olifant      elephant           resten                            muziek          music
                                               remains
insect       insect             plat           flat               batterij        battery
krokodil     crocodile          rond           round              adres           address
papegaai     parrot             direct         immediately        bom             bomb
konijn       rabbit             zich haasten   to hurry
dolfijn      porpoise,                                            Greek
                                uur            hour
              dolphin                                             kerk            church
                                seizoen        season
schorpioen   scorpion
                                duren          to last
termiet      termites                                             High German
                                proeven        to taste
kariboe      reindeer/caribou                                     bron            spring, well
                                kleur          colour/color
kameleon     chameleon                                            sintel          embers
                                jaloezie       envy, jealousy
buffel       buffalo                                              verwanten       relatives
                                juist          right
pissen       to piss                                              adelaar         eagle
                                fout           mistake
roos         dandruff                                             rendier         reindeer/caribou
                                gulzig         greedy
bek          beak                                                 eland           elk/moose
                                idee           idea
palm (2)     palm of the hand                                     arts            physician
                                manier         manner
kadaver      carcass                                              gif             poison
                                imiteren       to imitate
iiner        dinner                                               spindel         spindle
                                papier         paper
soep         soup                                                 sok             sock, stocking
                                fluit          flute
fruit        fruit                                                sluier          veil
                                trompet        horn, trumpet
             %                                                    sieraad         adornment
m                               meester        master
suiter       sugar                                                hut             hut
                                prostituee     prostitute
stof         cloth                                                kachel          stove
                                soldaat        soldier
katoen       cotton                                               kaars           candle
                                katapult       sling
jurk         (woman's) dress                                      kapot           broken
358      Nicoline van der Sijs

 wikkelen       to wrap           testikels   testicles          specie      mortar
 verzamelen     to gather         dokter      physician          oogst       harvest
 spits          pointed           medicijn    medicine           graan       grain
 langzaam       slow              pols        wrist              plant       plant
pech            bad luck          penis       penis              palm (1)    palm tree
 medelijden     pity              vagina      vagina             planten     to plant
 trots          proud             vulva       vulva              sorghum     millet, sorghum
gevaar          danger            pus         puss               lariks      larch
 begrijpen      to understand     koken       to cook, to boil   keten       chain
 zich           to remember       ketel       kettle             koper       copper
   herinneren                     pan         pan                mat         mat
geheim          secret            kop         cup (perhaps       pin         peg (perhaps
 oorzaak        cause                          borrowed)                      borrowed)
 trommel        drum              schotel     saucer             kar         cart, wagon
 trom           drum              vork        fork, pitchfork    riem        oar
 stotteren      to stutter,       pellen      to peel            anker       anchor
                  stammer         molen       mill               munt        coin
 heersen        to rule,          olijf       olive              salaris     wages
                  to govern
                                  olie        oil                kopen       to buy
 hinderlaag     ambush
                                  peper       pepper             markt       market
 straf          punishment
                                  kaas        cheese             kant        side, edge
 heks           sorcerer, witch
                                  boter       butter             kort        short
 elf            fairy, elf
                                  wijn        wine               kruis       cross
 kalender       calendar
                                  bier        beer (perhaps      cirkel      circle
                                               borrowed)         paar        pair
 Hokkien or Malay
                                  bont        fur                klaar       ready
 thee           tea
                                  mantel      cloak              zaterdag    Saturday
 Indonesian                       muts        hat, cap           pijn        pain
                                  zak         pocket             school      school
 hamboe         bamboo
                                  speld       pin                zeker       certain
 Italian                          spiegel     mirror             proberen    to try
 nul            zero              keuken      cookhouse          trachten    to try
 hank           bank              kamer       room               studeren    to study
                                  poort       door, gate         schrijven   to write
 Latin                            venster     window             pen         pen
persoon         person            muur        wall               dichter     poet
paard           horse             tafel       table              regeren     to rule,
 ezel           donkey            post (1)    post                             to govern
 kat            cat               paal        post               slaaf       slave
 leeuw          lion              metselaar   mason              pijl        arrow
 kameel         camel             mortel      mortar             toren       tower
                                                                            12. Loanwords in Dutch             359
    I
    tempel        temple                                                     schoonouders      parents-in-law
                                       Portuguese
    altaar        altar                                                      grootouders      grandparents
    offer         sacrifice            kakkerlak          cockroach          schoonkind        child-in-law
    priester      priest               banaan             banana             schoonbroer       brother-in-law
    preken        to preach                                                  schoonzuster      sister-in-law
                                       Portuguese or Spanish
    zegenen       to bless                                                   kleinkind         grandchild
                                       tapir              tapir
    demon         demon                                                      grootvader        grandfather
                                       muskiet            mosquito
    pil           pill, tablet                                               grootmoeder      grandmother
    bril          spectacles/glasses   Romance                               kleinzoon         grandson
    brief         letter                                                     kleindochter     granddaughter
                                       pot                pot
    motor         motor                                                      schoonvader      father-in-law
                                       zijde              silk
    straat        street                                                     schoonmoeder      mother-in-law
                                       pijp               pipe
                                                                             schoonzoon        son-in-law
    Low German
                                       Spanish                               schoondochter     daughter-in-law
    jas           cloak, coat                                                schoonouders      parents-in-law
                                       toekan             toucan
                   (perhaps bor-
                                       coyote             coyote             grootouders       grandparents
                   rowed)
                                       poncho             poncho             schoonkind        child-in-law
    grens         boundary
                                       hangmat            hammock            schoonbroer       brother-in-law
    Old Frisian                        maïs               maize/corn         schoonzuster      sister-in-law

    eiland        island               tabak              tobacco
                                                                             Italian or H i g h G e r m a n
                                       bataat             sweet potato
    Old Irish                                                                vasteland         mainland
                                       kano               canoe
    klok          clock
                                                                             Latin
•

                                       Turkish
    Old Norse                                                                noorderlicht      arctic lights
                                       koffie             coffee
                                                                             duizendpoot       centipede
    "f            reef
    haai          shark                B. C A L Q U E S                      baarmoeder        womb
                                                                             ruggengraat       spine
    Old Slavic                         French                                sleutelbeen       collarbone
    rogge         rye                  kleinkind          grandchild         zondag            Sunday
                                       grootvader         grandfather        maandag           Monday
    Picardic
                                       grootmoeder        grandmother        dinsdag           Tuesday
    moeras        swamp                kleinzoon          grandson           woensdag          Wednesday
    rots          stone, rock          kleindochter       granddaughter      donderdag         Thursday
    kous          sock, stocking       schoonvader        father-in-law      vrijdag           Friday
    plank         shelf, board         schoonmoeder       mother-in-law      vaderland         native country
    kamp          camp                 schoonzoon         son-in-law         aanbidden         to worship
    boetseren     to mould/mold        schoondochter      daughter-in-law
